People compare the desert to many different things. The pirates of Ini
Bantang and Barra Bantang say it is like the ocean: broad, trackless,
and completely indifferent to the fates of those who travel across it.
The tribesmen of Darp say it is just a hot, barren version of their own
great plains, while the Avauntois who look down on the Karaband from
their flying mountain simply shrug and say, "It's brown, and boring."
The silver-masked priests and princesses of Thind think it is like their
own country, full of lost cities, caravans cursed to wander forever,
monsters left over from the Angels' Disputation, and revenge.

All of these things are true, but none of them are right.

---

Thind has been an empire for a thousand years. At times, its masked
rulers have governed everything from the Wise River in the north to Ini
Bantang in the south, and from Cap di Perçalle in the west to the East
Pole itself---everything, of course, except the dragon's isles. It has
twice been conquered by the Darpani, and twice more torn itself to
pieces with magic in a human echo of the Angels' Disputation.

Today, people say of the Thindi that they never do anything for the
first time. They have a ritual for everything: a new year's first cup of
tea, the beginning or end of marriage negotiations with a business
acquaintance, the death of a favorite pet. They have rules for how one
should dress, too, rules so precise that they leave almost nothing to
whim. If you see a man wearing a *dhoti* folded two finger widths below
his navel, a turban knotted in the rear, and rope sandals with
unbleached tie strings, you may know that he is the unlettered youngest
son of a peasant family that does not own its own hippo. Put a plain
shawl on his shoulders, and you may know that he can read; knot his
turban differently, and you proclaim that he is the oldest son, or a
middle child (whom the Thindi consider unlucky, since they cause so much
trouble).

In the Karaband, on the other hand, people are proud of the fact that no
two *deels* are exactly alike. We lengthen them, shorten them, add
pockets in common or unlikely places, reinforce the shoulders if we
frequently carry heavy loads... Over time, every *deel* learns from its
wearer how to do its job better, and every Karabandi learns how to read
a person's life from their *deel*.
