To whom it may concern,

Attached please find "Maddy Roo", a completed middle grade novel, for your consideration. Aimed at ages 8-12, "Maddy" includes a courageous young kangaroo, some robots, lots of adventure, and an exploration of what it means to be a person no matter what shape you are. My previous publications include two children's books ("Sensible Adventures" with Annick Press, and "Bottle of Light" with Scholastic), several short stories, and over a dozen non-fiction books, including the 2007 Jolt Award winner "Beautiful Code".

I hope you enjoy meeting Maddy in this first book of a completed trilogy, and I look forward to hearing from you.

Sincerely,

Greg Wilson
65 Highfield Road
Toronto, Ontario M4L 2T9
+1 416 435 9779
gvwilson@third-bit.com

----

"Maddy Roo" takes place in a world of anthropomorphic animals and patchwork robots. Its protagonist, Maddy, is a 12-year-old kangaroo whose younger sister, Sindy, is a "throwback" with no fur, scales, or tail. Their father was kidnapped by a raiding band of robots two years before the story opens; they and their mother have struggled to make ends meet since then.

While Maddy is out one evening with a goat boy named Gumption they rescue a damaged robot from a stream. Its regulator has been broken, which allows it to reveal that another raid is about to take place. Maddy and Gumption rush back to town to warn everyone. The raiders are driven off, but not before taking Maddy's sister and two other children.

Maddy teams up with the rescued robot, Dockety, to get her sister back. The pair manage to catch up with the raiders and free the prisoners, but in the confusion that follows, Maddy, Sindy, and Dockety are stranded in a dangerous swamp called the Mire. They take refuge in an abandoned bunker, only to discover that it is the lair of a mad robot named Patient in Darkness, who is responsible for the raiding parties.

The trio escapes by bolting a flying suit onto Dockety and get back to town moments ahead of the raid. In the aftermath of the battle that follows, Maddy realizes that she knows how to free the bots that Patient has enslaved. She uses the flying suit to return to the bunker and break Patient's control. As the story ends, Dockety reveals that Maddy's father is still alive and is being held prisoner in the bot city of Heck.
