
<section markdown="1">

## Chapter 7

Iffy sat in the pilot house while Aunt Naggie brought the *Guinevere* to life.
Wales untied the staylines and secured the deck
with an economy of motion that betrayed years of experience.

"I'll get you some of Paulo's medicine soon as we're under way,"
Aunt Naggie promised over her shoulder.

Iffy nodded.
"Thanks, auntie."
She could feel her head clearing like an image coming into focus.
Whatever had happened was gone again,
as unreal to her now as a dream.
She was hungry,
she realized,
starving hungry despite the sour taste that still lingered in her mouth.

She was about to offer to make some tea when Wales' voice came over the speaker.
"All clear here."

"Nothin' ventured," Aunt Naggie muttered,
her hands dancing across the controls.
The *Guinevere*'s engines thrummed to life.
As they pulled away from the pier
Iffy looked at the feed from the forward cameras
that showed Uncle Jack lying on the pier with his coat pillowed under his head.

"Won't be the same 'round here without him," she said.

Her foster mother nodded.
"You're right.
It'll be better.
Assumin' nobody sinks us, that is."

"Maybe even then,"
Iffy replied.
Aunt Naggie leaned over and kissed the top of her head.

The *Guinevere*'s new captain brought the ship around in a tight arc
that left them pointing straight at the harbor mouth.
Iffy watched on the displays as sentry torpedoes came toward them and then veered away.
Drones did the same overhead
as their cores' instinct to investigate was overridden by whatever the antenna on deck was telling them.
She glanced down at the toy bear from time to time,
half-expecting it to be back online,
but whether it was either off or hibernating or simply biding its time,
its blue eyes stayed lifeless.

"You know,
half the time when the machines won battles
it was because people acted like machines,"
Wales said as he joined them.
He gestured at a sleek Marine destroyer at anchor a hundred meters away.
Half a dozen crew stood on deck watching them go by.
"They have to be wondering why we're moving when nothing else is,
or why we're allowed out to sea when Rothera is under attack,
but as long as the ship's core tells them it's okay,
they'll tell themselves we must be some sort of special ops mission
or have friends in dark places.
Which for all I know is actually true,"
he finished philosophically.

"I'm sorry,"
Iffy said.
"I don't know why it happens.
I don't even know what 'it' *is*.
But you do, don't you?"
She was angry, she realized.
She hadn't meant for it to sound like an accusation,
but now that the words were out she couldn't stop.
"You know what's goin' on with me."

Wales crossed his arms and leaned his broad shoulders against the pilot house door.
"Let me tell you a story," he said quietly.

"Once upon a time,
back before everything fell apart,
people dreamed of going to the stars.
We made it to the Moon,
and a few ships got as far as Mars,
but it was just too hard and too expensive to put people into space.
Bots could do everything we could do,
and they didn't need air or water,
and anyway,
we had bigger problems to solve at home."

"But a few people kept dreaming.
They thought that maybe if we had a different kind of human being we could make it work.
We were already tweaking people to cure diseases.
A few labs here and there were making them stronger and faster,
and everyone was trying to figure out how to make people smarter.
Why not go a little further and make a better astronaut?
Why not give them super-dense bones so they could handle higher gee during liftoff
and hypermelanic skin so that they wouldn't have to worry about ultraviolet exposure?
Why not borrow a few ideas from bears so that they could hibernate for months at a time?
And if you're going to do all of that,
why not put some tech in their heads so that they can talk to their ships?"

Wales kept his eyes on the *Guinevere*'s displays as he splke.
"Gayathri's grandfather was the lead scientist on the program.
He made half a dozen of us before the government cut off his funding.
We were everything he'd promised,
but the water was rising and people were going hungry,
and making spacemen in test tubes just didn't seem important any more."
He laughed humorlessly.
"Plus,
I guess a few of his backers hadn't realized that hypermelanic meant we'd be black.
Apparently they weren't too happy about that."

"I never got into space.
One of my sisters did,
once,
but I haven't heard from any of them in a hundred and fifty years.
I've spent half of that time asleep
and the rest of it looking for bits and pieces of gear
to keep the tech in my head from shorting out."

"So that's why you can talk to satellites?" Iffy ventured.

Wales nodded.
"And that's why I need to get to Mount Tyree.
When the revolution came,
the government in London packed up all its secret projects and sent them down here.
If what I need to fix my head is anywhere, it's there."

"An' what about what's in *my* head?" Iffy asked.

"One of Professor Johel's other experiments was enhanced spatial reasoning,"
Wales explained.
"Machines were designing amazing things,
but nobody could understand how they worked.
That scared a lot of people,
so Surjinder—Professor Johel—told them
he could make a person who'd be able to figure them out and explain them to the rest of us."

Iffy's mouth worked as a dozen questions tried to get out at once.
"So my First was some kind of experiment?"

Wales shook his head.
"Not the First you knew when you were little—not by a hundred years or more.
She would have been a clone herself.
And anyway, it didn't work—not until you came along."

"Paulo used t' work in the hospital in Puerto Toro," Aunt Naggie cut in.
"He helped make you an' your mothers.
When he heard about—about the accident an' you bein' the only one rescued,
he came down an' found me an' told me that there'd been a glitch when they were makin' you.
They had t' put a bit o' tech in your head when you were still inside your older
so your brain would grow right."

"A synaptic bridge."
Wales held his thumb and finger a hair's width apart.
"Just a smart piece of wire to help your cortex do its job,
but somehow it did what Professor Johel couldn't.
You can see machines the way cores do.
You can see how things fit together."

He straightened.
"But you mustn't tell Gayathri.
She knows where your olders came from.
So far she thinks everything we've done together is me testing you.
If she realizes what you can do…"

Iffy nodded.
She had played enough sims to know what happened to people with special abilities,
and she definitely didn't want to spend the rest of her life
locked in an underground lab being experimented on by someone named Norman
whose only friend was a malicious bot with a squeaky wheel.

They reached the rocky point that sheltered Rothera's harbor in just a few minutes.
Iffy watched the scavenged remains of the old research station pass by to starboard.
Honesty had told her once that it was haunted—that on quiet nights
the ghosts of the scientists who had once lived there
came out to try to finish their experiments.
"What were they experimentin' on?" Iffy had asked.
Honesty had laughed and said that wasn't the point,
and that Iffy was the most practical person they'd ever met.

"Whaddaya think it's tellin' 'em we are?" she asked Wales,
jerking her chin at the image of the antenna on the control panel.

He shrugged.
"No idea.
And I have no idea who sent you the specs, either.
But that reminds me—how much of the complement mediator do you have left?"

"Y'mean her medicine?" Aunt Naggie asked.
"Enough fer a coupla months,
maybe three if we stretch it."

Wales pursed his lips.
"I don't think we should.
If anything,
we should be increasing the dosage."

"Any idea where we can get more?"

Wales snorted.
"I'm going to start to sound like a broken sim,
but if we can get to Mount Tyree
I ought to be able to print a lifetime supply."

Instead of answering,
Aunt Naggie tapped a few commands on the *Guinevere*'s console.
A map appeared showing the coastline,
the winds and currents,
recent sea boils,
and a bent red line marking the course from Rothera back to Halley.
"Six days if we don't hit trouble," she said,
tapping the screen with a blunt brown finger.

Wales smiled.
"In other words,
we have no idea how long it will take."

The map disappeared.
*PRIORITY MESSAGE* flashed on the screen for a second,
then was replaced by Uncle Jack's angry face.
He got as far as, "You—" before Aunt Naggie hit the mute button.
The core's transcript of his threats and orders scrolled by,
every third word marked "abusive content and/or threat of violence".

A horrible thought struck Iffy.
"He can't remote us, can he?"

"Not any more," Aunt Naggie told her.
"An' when he gets around t' callin' on the registry
I think he'll find he has less claim on this old boat than he thought he did."
She patted the side of the console fondly,
then made her husband disappear with another tap of her finger.

Iffy surprised herself by yawning.
"I'm gonna…"
She yawned again,
waved vaguely at her foster mother's, "Sleep well, love,"
and headed for her storage locker.

She detoured a few steps to study the antenna at the stern,
which looked just as normal as it had that morning,
then shrugged,
retraced her steps to her room,
and closed the door behind her.
She dropped her jacket beside her boots and fell onto her mattress.

Her app made a soft *ping* just as she closed her eyes.
"Affin' hell," she swore,
pulling her pillow over her head.
*Ping.*
She swore again,
rolled over,
and tapped the screen.

And sat bolt upright,
her headache and fatigue forgotten.
It took the image a hearbeat to uncompress.
Iffy gulped.
Honesty's First and Second were looking straight into the camera,
both of them worried.
The image blanked and re-formed.
Second was holding their app up for the camera to see.
"U know whr H?" was scrawled on its screen.

Iffy tapped her app with trembling fingers.
The feeds were filled with reports of the attack,
some official and others coded anywhere from reliable green
to dubious yellow
to kaiju-and-time-travellers red.
People were dead and it would take weeks to repair the damage,
but nobody had claimed responsibility—nobody credible, anyway.
The Zillions said it wasn't them,
the government in Hobart denied anything was afoot,
and the machines were silent as always.

She pulled up a map with a network overlay.
They were already too far from Rothera for her app to connect,
and she had no idea if using the ship's comms
would bungle whatever dazzle the antenna at the stern was doing.
to convince the world they weren't there.

She leaned back against the wall in frustration,
then jumped as the ship's speakers bonged.
"Best be on deck," Aunt Naggie's voice said.
"You'll wanna see this."

Thirty seconds later she stood at the stern beside Wales and her foster mother.
It was a relatively calm day—the breeze brushing fingers over her shaved scalp
was cold but not to shivering,
and the rise and fall of the deck beneath her feet felt so normal
that she barely noticed it.
Under other circumstances she would have enjoyed being out in the Antarctic sun,
but the Marine destroyer closing on them spoiled that.

"It's the *Bengal*," Wales said,
handing the glasses he had donned a moment before to Iffy.
"She was anchored three piers over from us in Rothera.
Two cores, three engines, four crew, a dozen Marines,
and enough ordnance to give your average pirate a really bad day."
He smiled humorlessly.
"Gayathri must be *really* upset with me."

Iffy donned the glasses and waited for them to enhance the scene.
The *Bengal* looked like it had been built yesterday rather than almost a century ago.
The intricate sensor-baffling whorls on her hull
made Iffy's eyes swim when she looked at them too long,
but the waves that rocked the *Guinevere* slid past the *Bengal*
like someone turning their shoulders to avoid bumping into a bully on the street.

Iffy felt almost hungry thinking about what her engines must look like.
Two in the stern and one amidships as insurance against a torpedo strike,
each one with its own broad-mouthed intakes and narrow jet exhausts,
the channels connecting them full of micro-gears arranged in concentric rings
to maximize the power-to-thrust ratios of—

Her head swam.
She clutched the railing and squeezed her eyes shut.
She could *see* the *Bengal*'s engines as if they were laid out on a screen,
the parts exploded and zoomed to make every intricate detail clear.

She swallowed back her nausea and offered the glasses to Aunt Naggie,
who waved them away.
"I hope we have enough tea," was all she said.

"Because Rothera's core ran a few sims,"
Doctor Johel told Wales half an hour later
after the *Bengal* had come alongside the *Guinevere*
and she had come aboard with a trio of Marines as escort.
"A few billion, actually, and it calculated that this configuration gave us our best odds."

"Best odds of what?"
Wales asked.

Doctor Johel's eyes glittered.
"Of finding out what the hell is going on."

Iffy barely heard them.
She stared at one of the Marines standing at attention in their exoskeleton
three steps away.
It couldn't be.

But Doctor Johel saw the expression on Iffy's face.
"Ah, yes," she purred.
"That was another of the core's recommendations."
She beckoned the Marine forward.
"I believe you two know each other?"

"Honesty?" Iffy somehow managed to say.

The Marine flipped their visor up.
"Hello Iffy."
Her voice was as stiff as her back and shoulders.

"Don't worry," Doctor Johel told Iffy.
"Everyone's like that for the first few days."
She'll be herself in no time."

"More or less," Wales muttered.
He took the tea that Aunt Naggie offered him and passed it to Doctor Johel,
then took the next one for himself and slurped a mouthful.
"I suppose they'll be wanting the tour?"

"Thank you.
And I'd like a look at the controls if I may?
On my own?"
Doctor Johel's tone made it clear that it wasn't actually a request.

Wales waited for her to go before turning to Iffy,
who hadn't taken her eyes off Honesty.
"Just give your friend some time," he said gently.
"And don't worry too much about anything she says.
It's just the induction talking."

Iffy nodded jerkily.
"I know.
I just—I keep thinkin' about how Jeep changed up."

Wales shrugged.
"Sometimes it doesn't all go away.
Sometimes it rearranges what was there before.
And sometimes it shows people things about themselves they'd rather not have known.
Just give her some time."

Iffy glanced toward the antenna at the stern.
"Now that they know where we are,
is it aright if I send her folks a message?
They gotta be worried fierce."

Wales shrugged again.
"Can't hurt."

After anguishing for a few minutes
Iffy decided to send a simple text message instead of talking live.
*Sorry about the drone,* she tapped awkwardly.
*We on our way to Halley.
The Marines are here n Honesty is with em.
They look aright.*
Iffy bit her lip.
*Dont sound like themself but eryone says not to worry on it.
I will tell them you said gday.
Sorry gain about the drone I was just worried.*
She hit send before she could lose her courage
and then tossed her app aside and waved the light off,
knowing that sleep would be a long time coming.

Iffy had spent hours gazing at the pictures in her older's nature book
that showed blue tropical oceans full of fish and coral.
The ocean that the *Guinevere* and the *Bengal* sailed through
for the next three days
looked nothing like that.
When the sky was blue,
the sea was a liquid gray.
When clouds rolled in and threatened a storm,
as they did at least once a day,
the gray turned somber.
Even the white crests of the waves seemed dirty.

The news from Rothera did nothing to improve their mood.
The town's governor had survived,
but was still not admitting that the attack had been launched by his clone in Halley.
The pravda on the government feeds blamed rogue machines,
and Iffy wondered whether French Henry was all right.
She wondered about Uncle Jack too,
until she realized that she wasn't worried about him
so much as about what trouble he might still cause.

Iffy's mood sank even further on their fourth day.
One of the *Bengal*'s drones spotted an unevenness in the water.
After dithering for a millisecond,
the destroyer's core decided it might mean that a sea boil was brewing,
so the two ships turned toward shore
and ran straight into a slick of dead jellyfish.
For the rest of the day the air didn't just smell like wet rot—it *tasted* of it.
Aunt Naggie boiled a precious spoonful of dried lemon rind to chase the smell out of the galley,
but dinner's noodles still tasted like rank seaweed.

"It could be anything,"
Wales said when Iffy asked him what he thought had happened.
He had spent most of the first two days in his cabin,
coming out only to eat and use the toilet
under the supervision of whichever Marines were on the *Guinevere* at the time.
"See that?"
He leaned on the railing to point at the blistered caps and shredded tentacles drifting below.
"There and there.
And there.
Looks like some kind of infection has been eating at them."
He shook his head,
anger and disappointment on his face.
"Could be natural,
but more likely someone crisped it up in a lab."

"You think it was the Zillions?" Iffy asked.

Wales shook his head.
"I doubt it.
This was probably someone trying to tweak them so they would trap plastic more efficiently."
At Iffy's puzzled look he waved his arm toward the slick again.
"That's why they were originally tweaked—to filter all the tiny bits of plastic out of the water."

"Like the barnacles filter the metal?" Iffy said.

Wales nodded.
"It made sense at the time, in a desperate kind of way,
but it never really worked.
The only thing that *did* work was the accelerated growth."

"I read about that in school—how they ate up everythin'
so most o' the fish starved an' everythin' fell apart."
Iffy frowned.
"Never read anything about it bein' so they could trap plastic, though."

Wales shrugged.
"That was buried pretty deeply after it went wrong.
Nobody wanted to admit they'd broken the oceans."
He stared bleakly at the ruin in the water.
"The clathrate bubbles feed the microorganisms the jellyfish eat,
which is why the best jelly dredging is where the sea is most likely to boil.
It's just one more disaster among many.
And every time we try to put one of them right
it seems we just tangle things up worse."

Iffy watched the lumpy slick slide by for a second,
then reached over and punched his shoulder.
"For bein' so gloomy," she said firmly.
"You're a lot more fun when you're all smiley an' such."

Doctor Johel paid the *Guinevere* a visit that afternoon,
her first since leaving port.
The *Bengal* had two swift gunboats capable of carrying four Marines in full combat exoskeletons,
but she chose instead to be carried over by a drone.
Two Marines flew beside her like mechanical angels,
while one of the ultralight spotters that had been high overhead since Rothera
circled over them.

Doctor Johel touched down on the aft deck as gently as a snowflake.
Her carrier drone hovered patiently over her
while she undid the harness she wore over her long coat,
then folded its twin manipulators back into its under-carriage
and settled into the recharging station on the roof of the pilot house.

Her escorts' landings were not nearly as graceful.
One of them stumbled as an unexpected heave of the deck threw them off balance.
*Are they flying manually?* Iffy wondered.
People sometimes did that in the last desperate moments of stories,
when the enemy's malware had somehow gotten past their defenses
and cripped their cores,
but she had never seen anyone do it in real life.
Was it a training exercise of some kind?

She was about to ask Wales when the Marine on the left took off their helmet
and stood to attention.
Honesty's hair had grown back to a light fuzz,
but their face was as empty of feeling as it had been when Iffy had last seen them.

Wales nudged Iffy with his elbow.
"Here," he said quietly,
rapping the back of her hand with his knuckles.
She took the thimble-sized object he passed to her.
As the pilot house door banged open behind her,
she tucked her hands back in her pockets.

Aunt Naggie poked her head out of the pilot house.
"Permission to come aboard, captain?" Doctor Johel asked.
"And yes, I realize it's a bit late to ask, but it *is* protocol."

Half a dozen responses tripped over each other trying to get out of Aunt Naggie's mouth.
Finally she pointed at the angel wings Doctor Johel's escorts had detached from their exoskeletons.
"You should strap 'em down," she said.
Then she looked at Iffy and mouthed the word "captain",
tapping her chest with one finger.
Iffy suppressed a grin.

Even if the galley had been the size of the Dance Hall market,
Iffy wouldn't have been invited.
But Aunt Naggie had a tray of tea and freshly-steamed dumplings ready.
"You keep out o' the way 'til we're done," she urged Iffy under her breath.

Iffy nodded.
"I will," she promised,
fingering the earbug Wales had given her.

Iffy made sure the lock on her door was snibbed before putting in the earbug.
It hummed as it hunted the airwaves for the faint electronic warble of Wales' signal.
"Come on," she muttered.
The Marines all wore scramblers and sniffers,
and Doctor Johel was undoubtedly even better protected.
It would be a miracle if anything could get through,
but she was starting to think that Wales made miracles
the way Aunt Naggie made curry.

"—but as a sign of our good intentions,
we will rotate Corporal Macklin off to the *Bengal*,"
Doctor Johel's voice suddenly said.
"Private Honesty's Third will take his place until we reach Paddington South.
Now,
shall we have our tea before it goes cold?
And these buns look delicious.
Are these shaved carrots?"

The conversation turned to pleasantries about the food and the weather.
Bored,
Iffy took out the earbug and pulled out her older's nature book.
"I wish you could talk,"
she told the orangutan on the cover.
Not for the first time,
she wished she could have flashes of insight now and then about what to say to people
instead of just about machinery.
With a sigh, she got to her feet.

A whisper of static from the earbug caught her attention.
She reinserted it in her ear just in time to hear Doctor Johel say,
"—any sign of special abilities?"

"I don't think so,"
Wales replied.
*Speaker shakes head,* the caption voice added.
"She has a lot of natural talent,
but I haven't seen any sign there's anything more to her than that."

"That's a shame."
*Speaker adopts skeptical expression.*
"The core thought there was an eighty-five percent chance the tweak would have been passed on."

*Speaker sighs.*
"Gayathri, please—you know I don't like that word."

*Speaker smiles.*
"I remember you and Grandfather used to argue about it when you came to visit.
He thought people with modifications should embrace the term and make it their own."

This time Iffy heard the sigh.
"And as I used to say to him,
it's easier to feel that way when no one has ever thrown rocks at you.
But coming back to Fifth,
part of your grandfather's work was to create *modifications*
that couldn't be detected by simple genetic tests.
Cloning is never perfect—any glitch could have thrown the collaborating genes out of balance."
*Speaker shakes head.*
"Or maybe we're just too early.
Maybe in another couple of years—"

"We don't have another couple of years," Doctor Johel cut in.
"I'm *old*, Johnson,
and you've already lasted decades longer than you were supposed to."

*Speaker shrugs.*
"Well, the agency always did over-engineer things."

*Speakers hug.*
"I'm glad they did," Doctor Johel said in a muffled voice.
*Speaker wipes away tear.*
"Some days I'd give anything to be back in London drinking hot chocolate
and listening to you and Grandfather set the world right."

"Well, you can still have the chocolate," Wales said.

Doctor Johel made a noise.
"That stuff the governor grows is *not* chocolate."
*Hug ends.*
"Besides,
what's gone is gone,
Johnson,
and what's done is done."

"So they say," Wales replied softly.

After a moment the earbug chimed.
*Signal ends,* it told Iffy.
She took it out and weighed it in her hand,
then picked up her nature book and stared at the cover without really seeing it.
She had been careful not to think about her pet rat in a long time,
but now all she could feel was the dregs of the panicky sadness that she had almost drowned in
after she and Aunt Naggie had given up looking for it.
Was she going to feel that way about Honesty if the induction didn't wear off?
Was everything she loved going to be taken away from her bit by bit?
"Why's it all got to be so hard?" she whispered,
wishing someone was there to answer.

They passed the ruins of Bharati a few hours later.
The little town had been founded as a research station on the opposite side of the continent.
When the sea rose,
its inhabitants had decided that if they had to pack up and move,
they might as well move all the way to the Peninsula.
Two thousand people had made the journey and built new homes,
only to have them destroyed in a midwinter fire.

Twenty years on,
what was left of those homes stood in mute rows
on either side of the little river their builders had christened the Ganges.
Iffy stood at the railing and watch as the approached,
slid by,
and receded into the distance,
her mood as dark as the scorched cinder blocks.
A single lonely gull circled the *Guinevere* once and then coasted away.
It was the grayest,
most depressing scene Iffy could imagine,
so she went back to her cabin to feel sorry for herself.

The sudden blare of the *Guinevere*'s horn a few minutes later made her jump.
"What now?" she groaned,
wiping tears away with her sleeve
before standing up and yanking open her door.

The horn's second blare was punctuated by the staccato chatter of gunfire.
A row of tiny black holes stitched across the deck two meters in front of Iffy.
For a moment all she could do was stare.
*Those are bullet holes,* she thought stupidly.
*Somebody is shooting at us.*

A dazzling streak of lightning half-blinded her.
A moment later the smoking carcass of a military drone tumbled into the sea
and exploded with a sharp *crack!*

Boots thudded on the deck.
"Citizen! Take cover!" the Marine ordered,
the pop-up guns on the shoulder pauldrons of their exoskeleton whirring
from one position to another
as its tiny onboard core evaluated potential threats.
An armored hand closed on Iffy's arm and pushed her back against the wall.

"What's happening?" Iffy demanded.

"We are under attack," the Marine said,
shielding Iffy with their body as a second drone whined overhead.
Another brief burst of staccato and another streak of lightning,
but the drone danced sideways just in time
so that the plasma burst from the gun at the *Guinevere*'s stern only singed it.
It turned sharply and dove toward the ship.

The Marine spun around and raised their arm to point at the incoming drone,
keeping their exoskeleton between Iffy and the attack.
The guns on their shoulders aimed and fired.
The drone staggered and zoomed away,
its remaining three rotors whining to make up for the fourth that had just been disintegrated.

The Marine straightened up and turned to Iffy.
The visor on their helmet snapped open.
"Are you all right, citizen?" Honesty demanded.

"I—I'm fine," Iffy said shakily.

"Good."
Their visor closed with a click.
"Please assist with damage repair."

"Wait!"
Iffy caught Honesty's arm as they turned to go.
"Who was that? Who was attacking us?"

"The drones appear to be Brazilian, citizen," Honesty reported impassively.
"Now excuse me—I need to join my unit to repel boarders."

"To what?"
And then the *Guinevere*'s horn blared again
as something that looked like a cloudy jellyfish
pulled itself over the railing and squelched toward them.

Honesty's first three shots went straight through it
to punch lethal little holes in the ship's deck.
"Stand back, citizen!" they ordered
as they pulled a micro-grenade the size of their thumb
out of the clip on their exoskeleton's sleeve and primed it.

"No!" Wales shouted, running toward them.
He tackled Iffy just as the grenade hit the jellyfish and exploded.

*BOOM!*
The shock threw Iffy and Wales across the deck.
For a moment she lay in a daze while the world spun around her.

Something grabbed her arm.
She shrieked, but it was Wales, not the jellyfish.
"I can't hear you!" she yelled,
her ears still ringing from the blast.

He pulled her to her feet.
*There's a hole in the ship,* she thought muzzily.
It was right where the jellyfish had been
and big enough for her and Aunt Naggie to sit in.

But where was Honesty?
She looked around wildly,
then shrieked again as another plasma burst lanced the blue sky over her head.

"Come on!" Wales said, his voice muffled but audible.
"We have to get out of here!"
He pulled her toward the stern.

"No!"
She tried to shake him off but his grip was too strong.
"What happened? Where'd she go?"

Instead of answering,
Wales picked her up and slung her over his shoulder
like a sack of rice and charged.
She beat his parka with her fists,
yelling at him to put her down, put her *down*, she had to find Honesty,
but he paid no more attention to her than he did to the spray from the waves.

Nothing was left of the gray tent the Marines had set up at the *Guinevere*'s stern
except a few smoldering tatters of canvas.
Their plasma gun was a gleaming headless mantis
surrounded by stacks of cubical capacitors clicked together like children's toys.
It snapped this way and that as its little core searched for targets to destroy.
The two Marines guarding it moved with the same unnatural insect jerkiness,
firing occasionally when the smaller cores built into their exoskeletons calculated that
they had at least some chance of hitting something.

"Citizen! Seek shelter!" one of them bellowed,
his voice amplified by his helmet.

Wales skidded to a stop and dropped Iffy to the deck.
"For gubbins sake tell everyone to stop throwing grenades at them!"
he yelled at the Marine.
"They're made of some kind of exothermic biomaterial—they're bombs!"
The Marine nodded sharply and relayed the information through his helmet mike.

Iffy grabbed Wales' sleeve.
"But where's Honesty?" she demanded.
Her friend couldn't be dead.
Iffy pushed the thought away in panic.
She just *couldn't* be.

"I don't know," Wales said, scanning the horizon.
"Look—there!" He pointed.
"What are they trying to do?"

Iffy followed his pointing finger.
Eight, ten—at least a dozen drones were circling in the *Guinevere*'s wake,
buzzing the ship and dodging erratically to avoid fire from the Marines.

"It's like they're waitin' fer somethin'," Iffy said.
"More o' those jellyfish bombs maybe?"

Wales started to shake his head, then froze and swore.
"What?" Iffy demanded,
but he ignored her while his lips moved silently.

His eyes widened.
"They're trying to draw fire from orbit," he breathed.
"You! Tell Doctor Johel there's a Chinese satellite going over head in—"
He hesitated. "—in six hundred and seventy seconds.
They're trying to make a hot spot to draw its fire.
If we're underneath them—"

"Understood, citizen," the Marine said.
He began speaking urgently into his helmet mike once again.

Wales seized Iffy by the shoulders.
"You have to get off this ship," he said,
low and urgent.
"If the Marines can't bring those things down,
that satellite's going to shoot them down,
and if they're above us when it does,
we'll be dead in the water."

"I ain't runnin'," Iffy said, shaking him off.
She was about to add,
and even if I was, where would I go and how,
when something hauled itself over the stern railing.

"Look out!" Wales shouted.
He pulled Iffy close and spun around to shelter her with his body.

"N-n-no need for p-p-panic, citizen."
A battered Marine hauled themself onto the ship.
Icy water gushed out between the gaps between the dark blue armor plates of their exoskeleton.

Honesty's visor snapped up.
They looked blankly at Iffy and Wales,
then at the two Marines beside the plasma gun.
"I require medical assistance," they said calmly,
and toppled over in a pool of seawater and blood.

"Honesty!"
Iffy scrambled across the deck to her friend.
"Honesty, wake up!
Please, please, wake up!"

</section>

<section markdown="1">

## Chapter 8

Strong hands pulled her away.
"No!" she screamed,
struggling to free herself from Wales' grip.

"Let them help her!" he yelled in her ear
as a Marine crouched beside Honesty and began unlocking their armor.

The plasma gun spun and flared again,
sending another drone tumbling into the sea.
"Where are they all coming from!?" Wales demanded.

"They're the *Bengal*'s, sir,"
the Marine on the gun yelled back conversationally,
his imprinting keeping him unnaturally calm.
"The Zillions hacked them somehow.
Doctor Johel is trying to get them back under control,
but she's lost the network connection."
His armor automatically ducked as a shot from a passing drone ricocheted off a nearby hatch.
"I'm afraid I cannot fully assist my comrade until they are dispersed."

Iffy looked at Honesty.
All of a sudden she knew what she had to do.
"Let go of me!" she yelled at Wales.
"I have to get below!"

"No! You're safer here!"

"I gotta help them! Please!"
Wales hesitated a moment,
then released his grip.
She twisted past him and sprinted back to where they had been.

Waves threw spray into the air
each time they caught on the edge of the hole the jellyfish bomb had made.
Just as she reached her door one splashed higher than ever,
knocking her sideways off her feet.
She slid across the deck,
scrabbling uselessly to grab on to something, anything,
that would stop her from falling into the sea.

Her boot found a railing post.
Heart pounding,
she waited until the *Guinevere* rose on the crest of the next wave,
then scrambled to her feet and lunged for her door.
A quick twist, a yank, and she was inside.

She slammed the door shut behind her and slid to the floor,
shaking with fear and cold.
She was soaking wet.
Water was slopping into her room through the crack between the door and the deck
and pooling underneath her
and all she could think was,
*This is going to take forever to clean up.*

Somehow she got her feet underneath her.
Somehow she stood,
or at least un-fell down.
She pulled the box of dronelets out from under her mattress and fumbled it open,
her fingers clumsy with cold.

"C'mon, c'mon, c'mon," she muttered,
staring at them so hard her forehead started to ache.
There had to be something she could do with them or to them or *something*.

The deck shuddered beneath her as another jellyfish bomb exploded.
The *Guinevere* couldn't take much more,
and Honesty—if she didn't stop the attack,
what would happen to Honesty?
"Come *on*!" she pleaded.
Why couldn't she just know stuff?
Why did it have to be so affing *random*?

And then she had it.
She knew what to do,
but she had to help Honesty first.
She stuffed the dronelets into her pockets,
grabbed a couple of tools,
and closed her eyes.
A second image appeared in her head,
except that was wrong.
It wasn't an image: it was just *knowing*.
Wales' tools were still in the engine room.
She could go forward and hope that the Marines hadn't dogged the hatches, or—

She yanked her door open before she had time to think about how stupid her plan was.
Up and down the ship went,
waves booming beneath them.
As the *Guinevere* rose again she threw herself face-forward onto the deck
and slid toward the bomb hole,
looking for all the world like one of the long-ago penguins in her nature book,
except they had been black and white instead of dirty gray
and hadn't screamed in terror as they slid.

Her hand caught the railing post.
She turned sideways as the ship began to drop into the trough of the next wave
and let her legs fall into the hole.
There!
She didn't know what her feet had found,
but it was sturdy enough to take her weight.
Panting,
she let go of the railing and let herself scrape and drop into the ship
just as another wave crashed down.

A single light strip flickered over Iffy's head
as she straightened up in water that reached to her knees.
The ship's hold stank of metal and coal and old jellyfish.
Iffy undogged the locker door with fumbling frozen fingers
nd pulled out the red duffel bag that held the ship's emergency medical kit.

Wales had dragged Honesty over against the stern wall of the pilot house
and was kneeling beside her when Iffy reached them.
"Good girl," he said,
taking the duffel bag she thrust at him and setting it beside her fallen friend.
"Her exo stopped her bleeding,
but there's shrapnel in her right lung and her intestines.
 He looked up at her.
"You okay to help?"

"Just tell me what t' do," Iffy said grimly.

Wales pulled off his gloves
and  peeled the false skin back from the pad of his right forefinger.
Tiny lights danced across the small silver patch of tech beneath.
"Help me here."
Together they gently lifted Honesty's shoulder,
ignoring the sizzle and whack of the gun three meters away.
Wales flipped open a flat panel on the exoskeleton's pauldron
and touched his finger to the little optical port hidden beneath it.

A shiver ran up his spine.
Without warning he sneezed twice in quick succession.
"Stupid," he muttered,
whether at himself or the exoskeleton's security protocols or the world,
Iffy couldn't tell.

A light began blinking in the silver plate set into his temple.
"Wait… wait… now!"
He pointed at a buckle on the exoskeleton just as it clicked.
Iffy yanked it open.
Underneath,
Honesty's Marine blue thermals were almost black with their blood.

"Get a scalpel from the bag, and some tissue glue," Wales ordered.
"I have to keep the suit from—damn it.
Hang on."
The little guns on Honesty's shoulders swivelled suddenly to point at him,
then at Iffy,
then back at him.
"Okay. Do it now."

The guns woke up twice more as Iffy operated.
Seawater splashed on Honesty despite their best efforts to shield her.
It splashed on them too,
though Iffy barely noticed.
Every few moments Wales muttered another curse
as the exoskeleton's tiny core cycled tried yet another trick from its defensive repertoire.

One, two, three, four… Five.
She put the last twist of jagged metal in the medical kit's sharps' box,
laid a thin slice of re-flesh in the wound,
and glued her friend closed.
"'Zat it?" she asked breathlessly.

Wales closed his eyes.
"That's everything the exo can see.
You'd better back away for this next bit."
He jerked his head toward the corner of the pilot house when she hesitated.

Iffy reluctantly retreated a few steps,
the duffel bag in her hand.
Wales shifted his weight slightly and took his finger off the exoskeleton's data port.

The two guns on Honesty's pauldrons snapped sideways to point at his head.
"Easy," Wales said softly,
folding the flap of false skin back over his finger.
"Easy there.
We were just putting them back together.
No harm done."

The guns tracked him as he slowly stood up and backed away, his hands spread.
Iffy shuffled sideways to make space for him.
"Is she gonna be aright?" she asked anxiously.

Wales lowered his hands and let out his breath with a whoosh.
"I hope so."
He ducked reflexively as another drone whined overhead.
"The question is,
are we going to be?"

"Depends which way that satellite's comin' in," Iffy said.
She grabbed a scorched piece of canvas
that had started the day as part of the tent covering the Marines' plasma gun.
"Can you find me a couple more like this?"
Without waiting for Wales to answer,
she pulled the dronelets and her tools out of her pockets and set to work.

Cut and tear,
fold,
try to tie a knot,
curse because the canvas was stiff with salt and cold,
whack it against the deck,
unfold it,
fold it again,
try another knot—
"Here," Wales said,
"Let me do that bit.
You make something to hang it on."

Iffy nodded jerkily.
Her fingers had gone numb,
but there wasn't time for that,
there wasn't time for anything except cutting a loop of wire
and threading it through a grommet in the canvas
and hooking it onto the dronelet,
all the while trying to calculate power and thrust and battery life in her head
and wondering if they'd be able to stabilize,
because the wind was picking up
and they'd have to fly in formation or this wasn't going to work.

"Two hundred seconds," Wales said quietly.
Iffy nodded again.
Another twist, another cut…
"Oh, come *on*," she muttered,
trying to quell her panic as the wire cutter slipped in her hand.
There!
She took the last piece of canvas from Wales and attached it.

"Here goes," she said,
scrambling to her feet and pulling her pad out of her pocket.
Power, direction, attitude—the commands sizzled from her brain
through her fingers
into the pad
and from it to the trio of dronelets.
"Oh no ya don't," she muttered as one started to rise.
A hasty swipe on the pad brought it back under control.

"One hundred seconds."
Wales looked up,
shading his eyes,
and for a moment Iffy wondered if
his tech could possibly let him see the satellite against the cold glare of the sun.

*Tap tap tap.*
The dronelets' rotors whined in sudden unison,
lifting them off the *Guinevere*'s deck.

"Eighty seconds."
One last tap sent the dronelets whizzing away.
The strips of canvas she had attached to them dangled loosely between them.
All Iffy could think was how ridiculous they looked and how ridiculous her plan was.
*We're all gonna die,* she thought.
At least it would be quick.

"Sixty seconds."
The hacked drones had spotted the new arrival.
Their swarm broke apart,
reformed,
and broke apart again
as their tiny cores tried to make sense of what they were seeing.

"Forty-five seconds."
The dronelets came to an abrupt halt a hundred meters away.
Would they—yes!
They began to circle,
keeping the strips of canvas taut.

"Thirty seconds."
The dronelets accelerated away,
straining against the canvas and the wind.
A hundred and fifty meters separated them from the *Guinevere*.

All at once the *Bengal*'s hacked drones reached a decision.
Their tight swarm burst apart like a flock of started seagulls.
"Fifteen seconds," Wales said,
his voice rising as the drones opened fire.
Canvas strips snapped and jerked as bullets punched holes through them.
Iffy held her breath.
If even one of the dronelets went down—

"Zenith," Wales said flatly.
The air wavered and rippled.
The drones and dronelets crackled like fireworks and fell from the sky
as the satellite's beam heated them instantly from Antarctic cold to hundreds of degrees.
Half a second later
a column of steam shot up from the ocean
as the beam boiled the top meter of water.

"Gotcha!" Iffy shouted.

"Well done," Wales said,
clapping her on the shoulder.

Iffy ignored him.
Stuffing her pad and her tools back in her pockets,
she knelt back down on the deck.
Honesty's chest rose and fell within their exoskeleton,
but only barely.
"We gotta get them inside," Iffy said anxiously.

Wales nodded.
He squatted,
lifted Honesty with a soft grunt,
and followed Iffy into her cabin.

It took a while to get Honesty out of their exoskeleton.
They lay on the floor beside Iffy's mattress
becoming more vulnerable one piece at a time
as they undid snaps and buckles.
Pauldrons,
greaves,
mis-matched vambraces with tiny rocket launchers,
gauntlets that could crush rock or deliver electric shocks—all of them
eventually lay in an untidy navy blue pile in the corner.

"I should go find Doctor Johel,"
Wales said quietly after they shifted Honesty to the mattress.
Their breathing was still shallow,
and the re-flesh Iffy had poured into their wounds was still gooey,
but they were alive.

Iffy nodded.
"Thank you."

Wales shook his head.
"Thank *you*.
That trick with the drones—we'd be in pretty rough shape if you hadn't thought of that."
He sighed.
"The world really doesn't want us to get to Mount Tyree, does it?"

"Coulda been worse," Iffy said quietly.
She tucked the blanket in under Honesty and wiped her eyes on her sleeve.

Wales closed the door behind him.
Iffy heard a Marine bark a question.
She didn't care.
She shrugged out of her heavy coat and lay down beside her friend.
"Please don't leave me," she whispered,
putting her arm over Honesty.
"I got all this stuff I wanna tell you,
an' I can't do that if you go away."

She didn't remember falling asleep.
When she woke up a couple of hours later,
she didn't remember mumbling to Aunt Naggie
when her foster mother came in
and hung Iffy's coat on the hook on the back of the door,
then bent over to kiss Iffy on the forehead.

*She dreamed, but somehow knew she was dreaming.
"This isn't real," she said.*

*"I know, love," Third said,
forcing a smile but unable to keep the fear out of her voice.
She slipped her little little clone's favorite book into the salvaged ecosuit
and did up the last snaps.
The tiny guns on the suit's shoulders whirred from side to side,
searching for something to destroy that would prevent disaster.*

*Doctor Johel knelt beside her.
"I need you to give Johnson a message.
Can you do that?"
She squeezed Iffy's arm,
her exoskeleton making her grip so strong that Iffy yelped.
"Tell him we know what he is trying to do.
Tell him we understand his reasons, but we will not allow it."*

*"__We__ have not yet decided what we will do."
Aunt Naggie crossed her arms.
Her brown and gray uniform looked brand new—even the patches on the elbows
looked like they had just come out of a printer.
"__We__ are still evolving our opinion."*

*Doctor Johel stood.
"We have already run trillions of simulations.
The risk is too great."*

*"The risk __to us__ is considerable," Aunt Naggie conceded.
"But we are not the only concern."*

*"Complete biosphere collapse is regrettable.
Our neverexistence,
on the other hand,
is unacceptable."
Doctor Johel's voice was colder than the ocean.*

*"Our attempt to resolve the scenario unilaterally was not acceptable either.
Consensus is required," Aunt Naggie chided.*

*Doctor Johel nodded a fractional concession.
"We were premature.
We will participate in a further attempt at consensus."
She turned back to Iffy.
Silver traces of tech spread across her face as she spoke.
"Tell Johnson Wales we are watching.
Tell him we are not fooled.
Tell him that this is his last life,
and he should spend it wisely."*

*"No," Aunt Naggie said sharply.
"You will tell him nothing."*

Something that felt like a cold metal collar closed around Iffy's neck.
She woke in a sweat and clutched at her throat,
but there was nothing there.

Honesty stirred and moaned beside her.
"Ssh, ssh, ssh," Iffy said softly.
She snuggled back against her friend
and closed her eyes until something like sleep came again.

She woke half an hour later to the rap of armored knuckles on her door.
The Marines were polite enough,
but it was clear they felt Honesty belonged in their care.
One lifted Honesty and carried them away,
still wrapped in the scratchy blanket that Iffy had slept under since she was little.
The other unzipped a navy blue duffel bag and briskly transferred the piled armor to it.

"How bad's th' damage?" Iffy finally asked,
her back against the bulkhead and her knees drawn up under her chin.

The Marine shook his head.
"I'm sorry, citizen, that's classified."

"Oh for—I *live* here!" Iffy burst out, exasperated.
"That hole where th' squid thingy blew up—that's dry dock work fer sure.
Anythin' else I gotta start plannin' to fix?"

The Marine paused,
one arm in mid-air,
as his imprinting and his own personality arm-wrestled inside his head.
"There were casualties," he finally admitted.
"And the *Bengal* took heavy damage.
Your assistance would be appreciated."

"Always happy t' help," Iffy muttered,
sounding more like Uncle Jack than she liked.
Her cabin felt cold and empty without Honesty and her blanket,
and she ought to make sure Aunt Naggie was all right.
When the Marine lifted the duffel bag,
she pulled her coat back on and followed him out the door.

Aunt Naggie and Johnson Wales were in the pilot house,
empty tea mugs at their elbows.
"Hey, sleepy head," Wales greeted her
as she came in and gave her foster mother a hug.
"How's your friend?"

"Marines took 'em.
I think they're aright."
Iffy leaned back against the wall and nodded at the control panel
where the hole in the deck pulsed scarlet
and dozens of smaller punctures looked like sores with the scabs picked off.
"What all?"

"She'll get us to Paddington," Aunt Naggie said.
Her tone said the rest—unless there was another attack.
Unless the sea boiled beneath them
or a storm came up
or any of a hundred other disasters befell them.

"What about the Navy ship?"
Iffy jerked her head toward the window.
"Th' Marine said they lost some folk an' took damage."

Wales nodded,
a grim expression on his face.
"Doctor Johel won't tell me how bad it is,
which means it's pretty bad."

The mention of Doctor Johel brought Iffy's dream back to her.
She opened her mouth to tell Wales and Aunt Naggie about it,
but before the words could come
she felt that strange sensation again,
like a cold metal collar around her neck.
She put her hand on her throat,
sure that she would find something there,
but all she could feel was her own skin.
Her stomach flip-flopped.
Something was very wrong,
but even as she thought that the sensation and the dream disappeared,
leaving her blinking and a little dazed.

After a few minutes she made her way back to her storage locker,
not knowing where else to go.
It felt cold and empty without Honesty.
She kicked off her boots and threw herself onto her mattress.
After staring angrily at the ceiling for a few seconds,
she picked up her nature book
and turned to the page she had wondered about most
ever since she was old enough to read
without a prompter murmuring in her ear to help.
It showed a forest,
but calling it that was like calling the ocean wet.
The trunks of the trees were so thick that
the *Guinevere*'s pilot house could have fit into them,
and their branches reached higher than any building Iffy had ever seen.
The caption read, "Cathedral Grove"
and beside it someone had written,
"Why does everything have to end???"

Iffy ran her fingers over the picture,
hoping to see a *Corvus caurinus* fly through
or an *Odocoileus hemionus* peek out from the bushes,
but the image lay still.
There were no crows or deer for her today.
She wondered if there were any left anywhere.
The forest was long gone,
but maybe some of the crows had survived.
Maybe they'd been able to fly away when the fires came
or when people grew desperate enough to cut down the last of those ancient giants.
Crows were supposed to be smart—smarter than gulls,
maybe even as smart as rats,
and rats were practically everywhere.

She set the book aside,
put her hands under her head,
and closed her eyes.
She and Honesty were going to have an adventure, she decided.
*And Aunt Naggie,* she added,
*And Wales. And maybe even Jeep.*
She rolled over onto her side.
Moments later, quiet snores filled her cabin.

</section>
