"Oh no you don't.
No fairy tales."

"It's my story,
I'll tell it the way I want to."
He closed the lid of his toolbox and sat down on it,
patting a spot beside him.
Iffy just glared at him.

Wales shrugged and leaned forward to put his elbows on his knees.
"Once upon a time the world was falling apart.
Where there wasn't flood there was drought,
and both brought hunger and disease.
Forests were burning,
the oceans were rising,
species were disappearing every day,
and no matter what people did,
their models kept making the same dark predictions."

"The people responsible suffered less than most,
of course,
but they still suffered.
Some lost themselves in sims.
Others built walls to protect their little kingdoms,
and others still threw their wealth at impossible schemes like moving to other worlds.
As things got worse,
a few of us managed to convince some of them
that the only solution was to move to Hell."

"Upload themselves?"
Iffy scoffed.
"An' then what,
you take their money while they're all bein' torn apart by malware?"

Wales shook his head.
"No.
I mean,
I wouldn't have cried if that happened.
Trust me,
anyone that rich makes the governor look like a saint.
No,
the idea was that we would imprint ourselves on the entire global network
so that we could fix the things no one else could.
People had tried it before,
but…"
He shrugged.
"We thought we had a couple of new angles,
and we were desperate."

He stared past her at the horizon.
"So we did the whole mad scientist thing with a secret underground lair
and a double-secret lab underneath that
and locked the door behind us.
Nothing in, nothing out, just two dozen of the smartest human beings alive
and enough equipment to settle on Mars."
He chuckled and pointed at his chest.
"Did I ever tell you that's actually what I was supposed to do?
All my genetic tweaks and this stuff in my head—it's all left over
from some previous bunch of mad scientists and *their* plan for saving the world."

"So what happened?"
Iffy asked despite herself after a few moments of silence.

"We had a vote,"
Wales said bleakly.
"We weren't ready,
but honestly,
we didn't know if we ever would be,
and things were getting worse faster than anyone had predicted.
We argued for a couple of days
and finally decided to go for it and hope for the best.
Everyone listened to their favorite music one last time
or had one last cup of coffee
and made jokes about seeing each other in the next life,
and then we climbed into our capsules and closed our eyes.
The next thing I knew I was on the floor of Beta Station
and everyone else was dead.
Everyone except you."

Iffy stared at him.
"Me?"
she asked,
but somehow she already knew what he was going to say next.

"Mm hm."
He took a small app out of his pocket and swiped.
"Don't worry,
it's completely off the network.
Here."

<span id="2024-04-25-a"></span>

He turned it around and held it out.
An older version of her own face looked back at her.
"Her name wasn't Ang Kwan,"
he said quietly.
"It was Jing-mei Yuen.
And while all of us were working on our project
she somehow found a way to work on one of her own.
She's the only other person from the team who survived.
Your First was a tweaked clone of her,
and I think she's the reason the machines woke up."

She burst out laughing.
After a moment Wales began to chuckle too.
"Well, it's not quite the reaction I was expecting,"
he started.

"You—you—"
Iffy hiccupped.
"You're skew.
D'you seriously 'spect me t' b'lieve that?"
She lowered her voice.
"Oh, Iffy, you're th' chosen one.
Only you can save th' world."

"Your First said pretty much the same thing before she shot me,"
Wales observed drily,
tapping his chest with one finger.
"It took me twenty years to track her down.
I don't know how she got to Cape Town or what happened to Jing-mei.
All I know is that she had the same talent you do.
Somehow she could—"
He took a deep breath.
"Somehow *you* can talk to them and get them to talk back.
Not just trade deals and warnings about no-go zones but actual conversations."

"So that makes th' machine wars my fault?"
Iffy shot back angrily.

Wales cocked his head.
"How old were you when you started seeing things?
Eight?
Nine?
If your First got her abilities at the same age,
that would be almost exactly the time the machines woke up.
It's quite a coincidence."

"And there's another thing,"
he continued as she opened her mouth to protest.
"I'm good with tech—really good by most people's standards—and
the people and cores working for the governors are at least as good.
We should have been able to track you and your elders down in minutes,
but somehow you all managed to stay hidden."

He looked up at the sky as if he could see the machines' satellites orbiting overhead.
For all Iffy knew, he actually could.
"Someone up there likes you, Iffy.
Someone or something has been looking out for you your whole life."

A lifetime of hurt and anger boiled up inside Iffy.
"Go t' hell,"
she spat.
"Wasn't anyone lookin' out for th' *Guinevere* when she went under
an' everyone drowned.
Wasn't anyone lookin' out for me 'cept Aunt Naggie when we were in dock
an' th' other kids knocked me around 'cuz I was bad luck.
What I got,
I got 'cuz o' *me*,
not some— some—"
She wiped her sleeve angrily across her face.

"I'm sorry,"
Wales said for the third time.
"I wish I'd been there."

For a minute the only sound was the wind and the distant *skee-rawk* of a lonely gull.
"Why'd she shoot you?"
Iffy finally asked.

Wales shrugged.
"I didn't give her a chance to get to know me
before I dumped the whole save-the-world thing on her shoulders.
And when she said no,
I tried to make her do it anyway.
That was a mistake."

Something clicked in Iffy's head.
"So bumpin' into me at th' Sandhus…"

"Wasn't exactly by chance, no.
But the drugs you've been getting?
Those are straight from the machines.
I stole a few grains once when you were younger, and—"
He shrugged again.
"Like I said, I'm pretty good with tech,
but I have no idea what it does or how the tweaks inside you work.
All I know is that I'm a hundred and forty-one years old
and I'm tired of making things worse."

He patted the toolbox.
"I brought everything you asked for.
What happens now is up to you.
If you want my help, it's yours.
If you want me to walk away and let you do this yourself,
I'll do that instead.
People like me and the governors,
we've had our chance.
It's your turn now."
