FIXME: escape back to the *Guinevere* with Wales, Doctor Johel, and some Marines

After anguishing for a few minutes
Iffy picked up her app.
*Sorry about that,* she tapped awkwardly.
*But I can't let 'em get into my head.*
Iffy bit her lip.
*Sorry gain hope your aright.*
She hit send before she could lose her courage
and then tossed her app aside.

Iffy had spent hours gazing at the pictures in her older's nature book
that showed blue tropical oceans full of fish and coral.
The ocean beneath the *Guinevere* sailed through looked nothing like that.
The clouds rolled in and threatened a storm,
turning the sea was a liquid gray.
Even the white crests of the waves seemed dirty.

The news from behind them did nothing to improve their mood.
The town's governor had survived,
but was still not admitting that the attack had been launched by his clone in Halley.
The feeds blamed the Zillions,
rogue machines,
and just about everyone else.
She wondered constantly if Honesty had been punished for helping her escape.
She didn't worry about Uncle Jack
so much as about what trouble he might cause.

Her mood sank further when the *Guinevere*'s core spotted
an unevenness in the water ahead.
After dithering for a millisecond,
it decided a sea boil was brewing and turned toward shore.
A few minutes later they ran straight into a slick of dead jellyfish.
The air didn't just smell like wet rot as they plowed through them:
it *tasted* of it.
Aunt Naggie boiled a precious spoonful of dried lemon rind to chase the smell out of the galley,
but dinner's noodles still tasted like rank seaweed.

"It could be anything,"
Wales said when Iffy asked him what he thought had happened.
"See that?"
He leaned on the railing to point at the blistered caps and shredded tentacles drifting below.
"There and there.
Looks like some kind of infection has been eating at them.
Could be natural,
but more likely someone crisped it up in a lab."

"You think it was the Zillions?" Iffy asked.

Wales shook his head.
"I doubt it.
This was probably someone trying to tweak them so they would trap plastic more efficiently."
At Iffy's puzzled look he waved his arm toward the slick again.
"That's why they were tweaked in the first place—to filter all the tiny bits of plastic out of the water."

"Like the barnacles filter the metal?" Iffy said.

Wales nodded.
"It made sense at the time,
in a desperate kind of way,
but it never really worked.
The only thing that *did* work was the accelerated growth."

"I read about that in school—how they ate up everythin'
so most o' the fish starved an' everythin' fell apart."
Iffy frowned.
"Never read anything about it bein' so they could trap plastic, though."

Wales shrugged.
"That was buried pretty deeply after it went wrong.
Nobody wanted to admit they'd broken the oceans."
He stared bleakly at the ruin in the water.
"The clathrate bubbles feed the microorganisms the jellyfish eat,
which is why the best jelly dredging is where the sea is most likely to boil.
It's just one more disaster among many.
And every time we try to put one of them right
it seems we just tangle things up worse."

Iffy watched the lumpy slick slide by for a second,
then reached over and punched his shoulder.
"For bein' so gloomy," she said firmly.
"You're a lot more fun when you're all smiley an' such."

"Johnson?"
Doctor Johel's voice came through a speaker on the wall behind them.
"Could I borrow you for a minute please?"

Wales nudged Iffy with his elbow.
"Here," he said quietly,
rapping the back of her hand with his knuckles.
She palmed the thimble-sized earbug he passed to her.

Iffy made sure the lock on her door was snibbed before putting in the earbug.
It hummed as it hunted the airwaves for the faint electronic warble of Wales' signal.
"Come on," she muttered.
The Marines all wore scramblers and sniffers,
and Doctor Johel was undoubtedly even better protected.
It would be a miracle if anything could get through.

"—are getting suspicious,
but my models say they will continue to follow orders until we reach Halley."
Doctor Johel's voice suddenly said.
"Now,
has she shown any further sign of her talent?"

"Not that I've seen,"
Wales replied.
*Speaker shakes head,* the caption voice added.

"That's a shame."
*Speaker adopts skeptical expression.*
"The core thought there was an eighty-five percent chance
she would be able to control her tweak by now."

*Speaker sighs.*
"Gayathri, please—you know I don't like that word."

*Speaker smiles.*
"I remember you and Grandfather used to argue about it when you came to visit.
He thought people with modifications should embrace the term and make it their own."

This time Iffy heard the sigh.
"And as I used to say to him,
it's easier to feel that way when no one has ever thrown rocks at you.
But coming back to Fifth,
cloning is never perfect—any glitch could have thrown the collaborating genes out of balance."
*Speaker shakes head.*
"Or maybe we're just too early.
Maybe in another couple of years—"

"We don't have another couple of years," Doctor Johel cut in.
"I'm *old*, Johnson,
and you've already lasted decades longer than you were supposed to."

*Speaker shrugs.*
"Well, the agency always did over-engineer things."

"I'm glad of that," Doctor Johel said.
"Some days I'd give anything to be back in London drinking hot chocolate
and listening to you and Grandfather set the world right."

"Well, at least we still have chocolate," Wales said.

Doctor Johel made a noise.
"That *moot* the governor serves is *not* chocolate."

After a moment the earbug chimed.
*Signal ends,* it told Iffy.
She took it out and weighed it in her hand,
then picked up her nature book and stared at the cover without really seeing it.
"Why's it all got to be so hard?" she whispered,
wishing someone was there to answer.

The sudden blare of the *Guinevere*'s horn a few minutes later made her jump.
"What now?" she groaned,
wiping tears away with her sleeve
before standing up and yanking open her door.

The horn's second blare was punctuated by the staccato chatter of gunfire.
A row of tiny black holes stitched across the deck two meters in front of Iffy.
For a moment all she could do was stare.
*Those are bullet holes,* she thought stupidly.
*Somebody is shooting at us.*

A dazzling streak of lightning half-blinded her.
A moment later the smoking carcass of a military drone tumbled into the sea
and exploded with a sharp *crack!*

Boots thudded on the deck.
"Citizen! Take cover!" the Marine ordered,
the pop-up guns on der exoskeleton's shoulder pauldrons snapping back and forth.
An armored hand closed on Iffy's arm and pushed her back against the wall.

"What's happening?" Iffy demanded.

"We are under attack," the Marine said,
shielding Iffy with der body as a second drone whined overhead.
Another brief burst of staccato and another streak of lightning,
but the drone danced sideways just in time
so that the burst from the Marine's gun only singed it.
It turned sharply and dove toward the ship.

The Marine spun around and pointed der arm at the incoming drone.
Der shoulder guns fired again.
The drone staggered and zoomed away,
its remaining three rotors whining to make up for the fourth that had just been disintegrated.

The Marine straightened up and turned to Iffy.
The visor on der helmet snapped open.
"Are you all right?" Honesty demanded.

"I—I'm fine," Iffy said shakily.

"Good."
Their visor closed with a click.
"Please assist with damage repair."

"Wait!"
Iffy caught Honesty's arm as they turned to go.
"Who was that? Who was attacking us?"

"The drones appear to be Brazilian," Honesty reported impassively.
"Now excuse me—I need to join my unit to repel boarders."

"To what?"
And then the *Guinevere*'s horn blared again
as something that looked like a cloudy jellyfish
pulled itself over the railing and squelched toward them.

Honesty's first three shots went straight through it,
leaving lethal little holes in the ship's deck.
"Stand back!" de ordered
as de pulled a thumb-sized grenade out of the clip on der sleeve.

"No!" Wales shouted, running toward them.
He tackled Iffy just as the grenade hit the jellyfish.

*BOOM!*
The shock threw Iffy and Wales across the deck.
For a moment she lay in a daze while the world spun around her.

Something grabbed her arm.
She shrieked, but it was Wales, not the jellyfish.
"I can't hear you!" she yelled,
her ears still ringing from the blast.

He pulled her to her feet.
*There's a hole in the ship,* she thought muzzily.
It was right where the jellyfish had been
and big enough for her and Aunt Naggie to sit in.

But where was Honesty?
She looked around wildly,
then shrieked again as another plasma burst lanced the blue sky over her head.

"Come on!" Wales said, his voice muffled but audible.
"We have to get out of here!"
He pulled her toward the stern.

"No!"
She tried to shake him off but his grip was too strong.
"What happened? Where'd de go?"

Instead of answering,
Wales slung her over his shoulder like a sack of rice.
She beat his parka with her fists,
yelling at him to put her down, put her *down*, she had to find Honesty,
but he paid no more attention to her than he did to the spray from the waves.

Nothing was left of the gray tent the Marines had set up at the *Guinevere*'s stern
except a few smoldering tatters of canvas.
Their plasma gun was a gleaming headless mantis
surrounded by stacks of cubical capacitors clicked together like children's toys.
It snapped this way and that as its little core searched for targets to destroy.
The two Marines guarding it moved with the same unnatural insect jerkiness,
firing occasionally.

"Citizen! Seek shelter!" one of them bellowed,
der voice amplified by der helmet.

Wales skidded to a stop and dropped Iffy to the deck.
"For gubbins sake stop throwing grenades at them!"
he yelled.
"They're made of some kind of exothermic biomaterial—they're bombs!"
The Marine nodded sharply and relayed the information through der helmet.

Iffy grabbed Wales' sleeve.
"But where's Honesty?" she demanded.
De couldn't be dead.
Iffy pushed the thought away in panic.
De just *couldn't* be.

"I don't know," Wales said, scanning the horizon.
"Look—there!" He pointed.
"What are they trying to do?"

Iffy followed his pointing finger.
Eight, ten—at least a dozen drones were circling in the *Guinevere*'s wake,
buzzing the ship and dodging erratically to avoid fire from the Marines.

"It's like they're waitin' fer somethin'," Iffy said.
"More o' those jellyfish bombs maybe?"

Wales started to shake his head, then froze and swore.
"What?" Iffy demanded,
but he ignored her while his lips moved silently.

His eyes widened.
"They're trying to draw fire from orbit," he breathed.
"You! Tell Doctor Johel there's a satellite going over us in—"
He hesitated. "—in six hundred and seventeen seconds.
They're trying to make a hot spot to draw its fire.
If we're underneath them—"

"Understood, citizen," the Marine said.
De began speaking urgently into der helmet once again.

Wales seized Iffy by the shoulders.
"You have to get off this ship," he said,
low and urgent.
"If the Marines can't bring those things down,
that satellite will,
and if they're above us when it does,
we're dead."

"I ain't runnin'," Iffy said, shaking him off.
She was about to add,
and even if I was, where would I go and how,
when something hauled itself over the stern railing.

"Look out!" Wales shouted.
He spun around to shelter Iffy with his body.

"N-n-no need for p-p-panic, citizen."
Honesty hauled derself onto the ship.
Icy water gushed out between the gaps between the dark blue armor plates of der exoskeleton.
De looked blankly at Iffy and Wales,
then at the two Marines beside the plasma gun.
"I require medical assistance," de said calmly,
and toppled over in a pool of seawater and blood.

"Honesty!"
Iffy scrambled across the deck.
"Honesty, wake up!
Please, please, wake up!"

Strong hands pulled her away.
"No!" she screamed,
struggling to free herself from Wales' grip.

"Let them help der!" he yelled in her ear
as a Marine crouched beside Honesty and began unlocking their armor.

The plasma gun spun and flared again,
sending another drone tumbling into the sea.
"Where are they all coming from!?" Wales demanded.

"Mostly likely a dazzled vessel hiding in the islands,"
the Marine on the gun yelled back,
der imprinting keeping der unnaturally calm
even as der armor automatically ducked a shot from a passing drone.
"Doctor Johel is trying to locate it."

Iffy looked at Honesty.
All of a sudden she knew what she had to do.
"Let go of me!" she yelled at Wales.
"I have to get below!"

"No! You're safer here!"

"I gotta help der! Please!"
Wales hesitated a moment,
then released his grip.
She twisted past him and sprinted back to where they had been.

Waves threw spray into the air
each time they caught on the edge of the hole the jellyfish bomb had made.
Just as she reached her door one splashed higher than ever,
knocking her sideways off her feet.
She slid across the deck,
scrabbling uselessly to grab on to something, anything,
that would stop her from falling into the sea.

Her boot found a railing post.
Heart pounding,
she waited until the *Guinevere* rose on the crest of the next wave,
then scrambled to her feet and lunged for her door.
A quick twist, a yank, and she was inside.

She slammed the door shut behind her and slid to the floor,
shaking with fear and cold.
She was soaking wet.
Water was slopping into her room through the crack between the door and the deck
and pooling underneath her
and all she could think was,
*This is going to take forever to clean up.*

Somehow she got her feet underneath her.
Somehow she stood,
or at least un-fell down.
She pulled the box of dronelets out from under her mattress and fumbled it open,
her fingers clumsy with cold.

"C'mon, c'mon, c'mon," she muttered,
staring at them so hard her forehead started to ache.

The deck shuddered beneath her as another jellyfish bomb exploded.
The *Guinevere* couldn't take much more,
and Honesty—
"Come *on*!" she pleaded.

And then she had it.
She stuffed the dronelets into her pockets.
Wales' tools were still in the engine room.
She could go forward and hope that the Marines hadn't dogged the hatches,
or—

She yanked her door open before she had time to think about how stupid her plan was.
Up and down the ship went,
waves booming beneath them.
As the *Guinevere* rose again she threw herself face-forward onto the deck
and slid toward the bomb hole,
looking for all the world like one of the long-ago penguins in her nature book,
except they had been black and white instead of dirty gray
and hadn't screamed in terror as they slid.

Her hand caught the railing post.
She turned sideways as the ship began to drop into the trough of the next wave
and let her legs fall into the hole.
There!
She didn't know what her feet had found,
but it was sturdy enough to take her weight.
Panting,
she let go of the railing and let herself scrape and drop into the ship
just as another wave crashed down.

A single light strip flickered over Iffy's head
as she straightened up in water that reached to her knees.
The ship's hold stank of metal and coal and old jellyfish.
Iffy undogged the locker door with fumbling frozen fingers
nd pulled out the red duffel bag that held the ship's emergency medical kit.

Wales had dragged Honesty against the stern wall of the pilot house
and was kneeling beside der when Iffy reached them.
"Good girl," he said,
grabbing the duffel bag she thrust at him.
"Her exo stopped her bleeding,
but there's shrapnel in her right lung and her intestines.
 He looked up at her.
"You okay to help?"

"Just tell me what t' do," Iffy said grimly.

Wales pulled off his gloves
and  peeled the false skin back from the pad of his right forefinger.
Tiny lights danced across the small silver patch of tech beneath.
Together they gently lifted Honesty's shoulder,
ignoring the sizzle and whack of the gun three meters away.
Wales flipped open a flat panel on the exoskeleton's pauldron
and touched his finger to the little optical port hidden beneath it.

A shiver ran up his spine.
Without warning he sneezed twice in quick succession.
"Stupid," he muttered,
whether at himself or the exoskeleton's security protocols or the world,
Iffy couldn't tell.

A light began blinking in the silver plate set into his temple.
"Wait… wait… now!"
He pointed at a buckle on the exoskeleton just as it clicked.
Iffy yanked it open.
Underneath,
Honesty's Marine blue thermals were almost black with their blood.

"Get a scalpel from the bag, and some tissue glue," Wales ordered.
"I have to keep the suit from—damn it.
Hang on."
The little guns on Honesty's shoulders swivelled suddenly to point at him,
then at Iffy,
then back at him.
"Okay. Do it now."

The guns woke up twice more as Iffy operated.
Seawater splashed on Honesty despite their best efforts to shield her.
Every few moments Wales muttered another curse.
One, two, three, four… Five.
She put the last twist of jagged metal in the medical kit's sharps' box,
laid a thin slice of re-flesh in the wound,
and glued her friend closed.
"'Zat it?" she asked breathlessly.

Wales closed his eyes.
"That's everything the exo can see.
You'd better back away for this next bit."
He jerked his head toward the corner of the pilot house when she hesitated.

Iffy reluctantly retreated a few steps,
the duffel bag in her hand.
Wales shifted his weight slightly and took his finger off the exoskeleton's data port.

The two guns on Honesty's pauldrons snapped sideways to point at his head.
"Easy," Wales said softly,
folding the flap of false skin back over his finger.
"Easy there.
We were just putting them back together.
No harm done."

The guns tracked him as he slowly stood up and backed away, his hands spread.
Iffy shuffled sideways to make space for him.
"Is de gonna be aright?" she asked anxiously.

Wales lowered his hands and let out his breath with a whoosh.
"I hope so."
He ducked reflexively as another drone whined overhead.
"The question is,
are we going to be?"

"Depends which way that satellite's comin' in," Iffy said,
pulling the dronelets and her tools out of her pockets.
"Get me some o' that canvas."

Cut and tear,
fold,
try to tie a knot,
curse because the canvas was stiff with salt and cold,
whack it against the deck,
unfold it,
fold it again,
try another knot—
"Here," Wales said,
"Let me do that bit.
You make something to hang it on."

Iffy nodded jerkily.
Her fingers had gone numb,
but there wasn't time for that,
there wasn't time for anything except cutting a loop of wire
and threading it through a grommet in the canvas
and hooking it onto the dronelet,
all the while trying to calculate power and thrust and battery life in her head
and wondering if they'd be able to stabilize,
because the wind was picking up
and they'd have to fly in formation or this wasn't going to work.

"One hundred seconds," Wales said quietly.
Iffy nodded again.
Another twist, another cut…
"Oh, come *on*," she muttered.
There!

"Here goes," she said,
scrambling to her feet.
Power, direction, attitude—the commands sizzled from her head to the trio of dronelets.

"Sixty seconds."
Wales looked up,
shading his eyes
as if he could see the satellite far above them.

The dronelets' rotors whined in sudden unison,
lifting them off the *Guinevere*'s deck.

"Forty seconds."
The dronelets whizzing away,
strips of canvas dangling loosely between them.
*We're all gonna die,* Iffy thought.
At least it would be quick.

"Thirty seconds."
The hacked drones had spotted the new arrival.
Their swarm broke apart,
reformed,
and broke apart again
as their tiny cores tried to make sense of what they were seeing.

"Fifteen seconds."
Her dronelets halted and began to circle,
keeping the strips of canvas taut.

"Thirty seconds."
The dronelets accelerated away,
straining against the canvas and the wind.
A hundred meters separated them from the *Guinevere*,
two hundred,
three hundred—

"Zenith," Wales said flatly.
The air wavered and rippled.
The drones and dronelets crackled like fireworks and fell from the sky
as the satellite's beam heated them instantly from Antarctic cold to hundreds of degrees.
Half a second later
a column of steam shot up from the ocean
as the beam boiled the top meter of water.

"Woo hoo!" Iffy shouted.
Wales clapped her on the shoulder.

Stuffing her tools back in her pockets,
Iffy knelt on the deck.
Honesty's chest rose and fell within der exoskeleton,
but only barely.
"We gotta get der inside," Iffy said anxiously.

Wales nodded.
He squatted,
lifted Honesty with a soft grunt,
and followed Iffy into her cabin.

It took a while to get Honesty out of their exoskeleton.
De lay on Iffy's mattress,
becoming more vulnerable one piece at a time
as they undid snaps and buckles.
Pauldrons,
greaves,
mis-matched vambraces with tiny rocket launchers,
gauntlets that could crush rock or deliver electric shocks—all of them
eventually lay in an untidy navy blue pile in the corner.

"We would have been fried if you hadn't done that,"
Wales said quietly when they were done.
"So thank you."

"Yes,
thank you,"
Doctor Johel said behind them.

FIXME: betrayal
