I love reading your prose. Your language is such a pleasure. In Iffy I
particularly love how so much is similar, so much is different, how sayings
have evolved over time (and which pop culture references have lasted). Tech
words vs ‘ten ways to sundown’, yip-yip, etc.
Also deeply pleased with the elements of distrust/fakery and incessant
advertising. They’re not telegraphed, just present.
This version of Iffy has a solid through-line with a start, a middle, and an
ending. That ending, however, is a little rushed. It’s tough to balance: the end
is so action-packed, scenes tumbling atop one another in constant motion.
–Some of those scenes include time breaks, which could be signalled with
formatting instead of words. Others need to be stretched out a bit. You want to
race to the ending while also letting readers know how that affects the
characters. A hurry, not a frenzy. A little extra text can make the difference.
But only a bit, because you don’t spoonfeed your readers (which is great). But
occasionally it feels like some of the scene context is in your head rather than
on the page.
The first 7 chapters were just <chef’s kiss>. So much character, the story’s
grounded in the physical realities of the world, every chapter hangs together
AND leads to the next.
- Nova Zembla interlude: there’s one paragraph without italics, which finishes
with an asterisk–what does that attach to?
Chapter 8: bit of a jump between “I hope we have enough tea” and “Because
Brazil is as likely to scuttle this ship” – had to read it several times to figure out
they were having an on-screen conversation.
- Wales moves from “Iffy, you HAVE to go” to “ok, let’s fix Honesty up” without
a blink. Given that, is it necessary for him to object? Or can his insistence on
her continued safety happen later?
- is Dr. Joel on board the Guinevere?
- Iffy should probably check on her aunt during the attack
- Iffy naps twice during the aftermath. Once makes sense, twice throws off the
pacing a bit (basically, the nap is keeping her in place long enough for her
conversation with Wales: they could just have the conversation instead)
Chapter 9: when they eat with the governor and Dr. Johel… what about Iffy’s
medicine/curry? Especially since it was brought up not too long before that
she needs more of it rather than less. It comes up again in Chapter 12, but
only briefly in a ‘we don’t have it’ way
-about that: she needs to be drinking more water. Especially once she starts
moving. If she’s bleeding that much and not drinking, she’d go down way
faster than she does. Even if she’s not drinking, she should be thirsty.
- when Iffy and Jeep reminisce, you could give all the teenagers names, not
just Akuma. Populate Iffy’s backstory.
Chapter 11: Sandrine thinks ‘both their bodies were the right age to be
children 20 years ago’ – except… Iffy is still a teenager?
-The chapter elides them leaving Halley for Bharati. I actually spent a moment
wondering if Bharati was somehow an area within Halley. How long did it take
them to get there? How much time has passed?
-When Iffy/Sandrine collapses, is it because Iffy’s bleeding from her nose? Or
because they were shot? If so, by whom, and when? And what mudslide was
Sandrine talking about?
-how did Iffy know where to stop? And how did Edson know where she was?
If there was some sort of communication behind the scenes, we should
probably see at least a little of it
Chapter 12: the pacing of the escape scene is choppy– lengthening it a little
might smooth it out. Perhaps some sort of marker when the scene continues
in the same place but time has passed?
-Iffy tells Dr. Johel ‘You sure talk pretty’ – reads a bunch of different ways.
Which did you mean? Or mean the most?
-does the italicized section have to be italicized? Do you want it to pair with
the Interlude sections? No right or wrong answer, I’m just curious
Chapter 15: when Iffy wakes up, only Wales is there. No mention of the other
bodies (Kerse, Johel, the bots). Might want to add them in
-I feel I should point out that Iffy doesn’t uphold her bargain with the machines.
Like, immediately, she says ‘I can’t help’ when they ask. That… should maybe
come back to bite her? Or: is it necessary?
-For my own curiosity: IFfy or EEfy?
-Where is Buhr? I keep trying to find place names on maps of Antarctica. Not
easy.
