---
layout: page
title: "Iffy"
author: "Greg Wilson"
permalink: /iffy/
---

## Chapter 1

Iffy had a bad dream that night.
It was the same one she always had,
and the worst part was that it wasn't really a dream.

She was on deck.
The sky was a perfect blue bowl overhead,
summer cold instead of winter freezing.
Second and Third were stuffing her into
a hand-me-down ecosuit that had cost them as much as one of their jelly dredging nets.
"Just for safe, love," Third said,
forcing a smile but unable to keep the fear out of her voice.
She kissed the family's youngest clone on the forehead
and slipped Iffy's favorite bedtime book inside the bulky orange suit.
"Just in case."

The ship's horn blared another warning.
Iffy started to cry.
Her olders had pulled her out of bed just a few moments before,
and she was only half awake.

Third hugged her again before Second pulled her away.
"There no time," the older clone snapped
as one of the hired crew ran past them toward the stern.
At the time Iffy thought Second was angry at her for something she'd done.
Years later she realized that Second had been angry at the sea for what was about to happen,
and at herself for not being able to stop it.

"She boil!" Fourth shouted from the crow's nest.
"Two hundred meter ahead an' ten point off starboard!"

Third sealed the last flap on the ecosuit.
This time Second didn't try to stop her when she wrapped her arms around Iffy.
"I love you," she said in Iffy's ear.
"I love you always an' forever."

"I love you too," Iffy replied tearfully.
She tried to return Third's hug,
but the thick insulation in the suit made it hard to bend her arms.

Second bent over and kissed them both on the tops of their heads.
She smelled like engine oil and the soap she always used when she shaved her head.
That was what Iffy remembered afterward---that,
and the stench of methane rising out of the sea around them.
Hundreds of meters below,
a million tiny bubbles of gas trapped in ancient clathrate ice on the sea floor
were about to burst free.

The deck pitched sideways as First tried desperately
to steer the *Rushin' Doll* out of the seething mass of foam that surrounded them.
"She blow! She blow!" Fourth shouted.
The ship's horn blared one last time.
The last thing Iffy heard before Third closed the ecosuit's faceplate
was a rushing sound like a train racing past her ears.

The ship staggered and dropped two meters.
Iffy screamed as she tumbled onto the deck.
Second and Third landed in a tangle beside beside her.
Ice-cold sea water crashed down on top of them.
Iffy screamed again as it dragged her and her olders against the metal taffrail.
Her olders grabbed for it,
but the ship dropped again
as the gas rising from the ocean floor
churned the water into a froth too thin to hold the boat afloat.
The last thing Iffy saw before the water closed over her
was Fourth falling from the crow's nest,
her arms and legs flailing against the perfect blue sky.

Her dream stopped then,
just like it always did.
She didn't remember the sea snapping the *Rushin' Doll*'s keel,
or the ecosuit's tiny core deciding that the safest place for her to be
was anywhere but there.
The suit was a hundred years old,
but its seals held.
It kept her warm while the thumb-sized motors in its arms and legs
steered her clear of the after-bubbles that would have swallowed a lifeboat.

And she didn't remember the *Guinevere* finding her hours later
or being hauled out of the frigid Antarctic water in a jelly dredging net.
The woman she learned to call Aunt Naggie said it was a miracle she had survived.
It was even more of a miracle that she was allowed to stay on the dredger that found her.
The *Guinevere*'s captain,
Uncle Jack,
didn't like children.
Or animals.
Or foreigners or the governor
or the co-operatives that bought the jellyfish he and Aunt Naggie
dredged out of the Weddell Sea
or the people who sold him supplies
or passers-by who looked at him the wrong way
or didn't have the decency to look at him at all.
He would have dropped her on the pier and sailed away.
The docksiders in Rothera never understood why he didn't,
and wouldn't have believe that
his long-suffering wife had put her hands on her hips
and told him that the child was staying or she was leaving,
which was it going to be?

So Iffy stayed, but not the ecosuit.
Uncle Jack had two pairs that night,
eights over fives,
but the Aussie across the table had three sixes.
"You were going to outgrow it anyway,"
he snapped over her tearful protests when she found out it was gone.
"Gotta pay for your keep somehow."

He would have gambled away the book tucked into the suit as well
if Aunt Naggie hadn't misplaced it until he forgot about it.
It had belonged to Third when she was Iffy's age,
and to Second before that,
and came from a time when people still made books you could hold in your hands
and there were still whales and tigers and giraffes.
Iffy read a few pages every night no matter how tired she was from chores.
She drew the pictures from memory on her tablet when she was bored by school,
and on those rare occasions when another child came on board to play with her,
she took out the book and told them all about *orcinus orca* and *panthera tigris*
and her favorite, *giraffa camelopardalis*.

"They were too real!" she said fiercely whenever anyone expressed even a hint of doubt.
"Real as gulls and jellies!"
Real as the handwritten comments in the book's margins that she spent hours deciphering.
Real as being hungry and lonely,
she sometimes added to herself as she grew older
and Uncle Jack's business dealings left them a little poorer each season.

Iffy woke that morning to the sound of Aunt Naggie bustling about in the galley.
She lay on the narrow foam packing slab she used as a mattress for one final precious moment
before slithering out of her salvaged sleeping bag
and pulling a layer of clothes over her thermals.
That banging was her foster mother's way of telling her that Uncle Jack was awake.
If she knew what was good for her,
she'd be up on deck doing something useful
before he stumbled out into the light looking for someone to yell at.

She closed her eyes and opened her nature book at random.
It was ridiculous---Jeep had made fun of her for a month
when he found out---but...

"Figures," she muttered when she opened her eyes.
The armadillo wasn't the most ridiculous animal in the book,
but it wasn't her favorite.
Still,
an armadillo day was better than a blobfish day.
She tucked the book into the slit she had cut in the foam slab to keep it safe,
yawned,
rubbed the stubble on her scalp,
and undogged the door of the storage locker
that had been her cabin for the past eight years.

As she stepped out onto the deck of the *Guinevere*
the sights and sounds and smells of Halley harbor splashed over her
like the waves in her nightmare.
She stopped for a moment to let her eyes adjust to the light.
To seaward lay the broken hulk of a carrier
that had driven itself aground a century before
to create a seawall for the town's harbor.
Dozens of ships and boats bobbed gently up and down in its lee.
Some were as old as the carrier,
patched and re-patched over the years like the *Guinevere* to stay seaworthy.
Others were newer:
broad-beamed cargo haulers flying the Aussie flag
or streamlined Zillion-built clippers with bright kite sails furled around triple masts.
Gulls wheeled overhead in their endless search for scraps,
complaining to one another about how cold the Antarctic summer was
and how nobody threw away really good stuff any more,
not like they used to.

The town watched the harbor like a grumpy old man watching children at play.
Back before,
Halley had been a research station where scientists studied the first signs of the melt.
As the ice disappeared and life back home became desperate
they converted their labs into temporary houses.
By the time their children were grown they stopped doing research
or calling the houses "temporary".

Two thousand people now made Halley their home under the governors' watchful eyes.
During the summer blooms they dredged jellyfish out of the sea
to render down for fuel and fertilizer.
When winter came they tended the town's precious greenhouses
or sailed north to Patagonia or the Australian territories
to find whatever work might get them through the long dark
so that they could start the cycle again.

--HERE--

Iffy shaded her eyes against the razor-edged sun.
A cluster of buildings was taking shape by the newly built pier on the edge of town.
Two were just bunkhouses,
but one was a general store,
and another---the big one that Iffy had watched like a hungry gull all spring---was a machine shop.
Shiploads of precious equipment had already been carted through its double-wide doors:
forges, presses, a lathe with a spindle thicker than Iffy's leg,
and the prize of them all,
an industrial printer from Nova Zembla at the opposite end of the earth.

It had arrived in the hold of a heavily-armed Aussie destroyer.
The whole town had turned out when the sleek warship came into harbor,
railguns bristling and drones darting back and forth above her.
They lined the streets and cheered
as the destroyer's crew and a squad of Marines escorted the boxy machine through Halley's streets
to the quarantine shed by the new pier.
Once Halley's core finished its months-long check for malware,
the only limit to what the printer could make
would be the plans and raw materials people could give it.

Iffy had seen some of those plans glowing softly
above the tables of Halley's three cafés.
She had taken surreptitious notes on her tablet instead of doing homework
while mechanics and engineers and core techs argued about weights and tolerances and expansion coefficients,
then spent hours looking up words she didn't know and figuring out how they fit together.

She wanted to be part of those conversations so much it ached.
But even more than that,
she wanted to know why visions of things she *hadn't* seen kept popping into her head.
Ghostly shapes appeared behind her eyes every time she thought too hard about the plans:
fractal capacitors
and ever-so-slightly irregular gears
whose off-center spin would automatically synchronize to reduce power loading.
She had gone as deep into the jungle as she dared to find anything that matched,
but every trail ended in "no results" or a blinking scarlet "restricted" warning.
After a couple of those she had stopped looking,
afraid of who or what might notice.

"Girl! Girl! Dammit, woman, where's that affin' girl?"
Iffy jumped as Uncle Jack's bellowed from below deck.
He had been out with his biffs the night before,
which was Uncle Jack-speak for drinking more than he could handle
and gambling more than they could afford.
Aunt Naggie somehow managed to winkle enough out of his phone while he was snoring to keep the *Guinevere* afloat,
but it had been weeks since they'd had fresh fruit,
and she couldn't remember the last time there had even been mention of new clothes
or of replacing their frayed nets.

"Girl!" Uncle Jack shouted again.
"Get your affin' tail down here *now* or saints help me you'll be scrapin' barnacles for a *week*!"
She heard a meaty *thud!* as he slapped the bulkhead with his hand for emphasis.

With one last longing look at the distant machine shop,
Iffy lifted the hatch beside her and scrambled down the ladder.
"I'm right here, Uncle Jack," she said breathlessly. "I was just---"

"You were just lyin' about like some fairytale princess, and don't try tell me otherways!"
The *Guinevere*'s captain glared up at her,
squinting as the bright sky framing her head assaulted his hungover eyes.
There was a bruise on his forehead that hadn't been there at dinner, Iffy noticed.
That might mean a visit from the Marines later.
He'd scowl and mutter and make excuses to them,
then bluster to Aunt Naggie after they were gone
about how the governors were just a pack of meat puppets
and how the town's cores were going to sell them all out to the Zillions
as soon as they could get a decent price.

"Your eggs'll be ready in a mo," Aunt Naggie cut in hurriedly
as Uncle Jack opened his mouth to unleash another bellow.
"Do you want a bit of curry on them?
I think I have---no, wait, not there..."
She rummaged nervously among the precious little glass jars
that sat on the shelf beside the galley's little two-loop stove.

"Affin' right I want a bit of curry," Uncle Jack grumbled,
settling into a fold-up chair that squeaked under his weight.

Iffy's stomach grumbled as the smell of eggs, turmeric, and cumin teased her nostrils.
With a tilt of her frying pan and a single practiced flip of her spatula,
Aunt Naggie slid two perfectly fried eggs into Uncle Jack's bowl.
Without so much as a grunt of acknowledgment,
her husband took the entire basket of naan from the center of table in one hand
and his plate with the other
and disappeared back into his cabin.
Just before the door closed
Iffy heard glass clink and something gurgle out of a bottle.

Aunt Naggie let out the breath she'd been holding
and smiled at her foster daughter.
"You'll be hungry then?"

"Not really," Iffy lied.

"Course not. Here."
She pulled a hard-boiled egg out of the pocket of her apron and slipped it to Iffy.
"And here, this too."
A piece of perfectly-browned naan,
still warm and slightly sticky with oil,
appeared out of another pocket.

"Thanks auntie," Iffy said gratefully.
"You eaten already?"

"Course, first thing," Aunt Naggie lied in turn.
She leaned over and kissed the stubble on top of her foster daughter's head.
"You best get that in you quick an' start work on that winch cable he's after havin' tightened.
An' he says the engine's got a knock in it again---best have a look at that too before it starts to bother he." 

"It's the reciprocating rod," Iffy said around a mouthful of fluffy naan.
"Mister Mishra will straighten it out if I take it in before he gets busy.
It won't cost anything,"
she added hastily before her foster mother could object.
"Not if I do a couple of odd jobs for he.
I could head over right if you wanted."

"Could you now?"
Aunt Naggie teased.
"Well,
if you're goin' that way
can you stop in at Sandhu's and see what they want for eggs?
Those were our last ones.
I'll tell Jack you're off doing chores once he's..."
She finished her sentence with an apologetic shrug.

"Thanks auntie," Iffy said gratefully.
She climbed the ladder and hurried aft as quietly as she could,
praying that the sound of her boots on the deck wouldn't draw attention.

The ship's toolbox rattled as she dragged it out from under the bench at the *Guinevere*'s stern.
Its cast-offs and hand-me-downs included only those tools so essential that even Uncle Jack wouldn't sell them.
After a furtive glance over her shoulder,
she reached up under the bench and unclipped the canvas bag that held *her* tools,
the ones she had salvaged and mended or been given in return for doing odd jobs for people around the harbor.
She pushed the toolbox back into place and tucked her toolbag under her coat.

It only took her a few moments to disengage the bent rod from the engine and tuck it into a pocket.
She closed the engine casing as gently as she could and hurried down the gangplank,
the weight of life on the *Guinevere* lifting from her shoulders
as soon as her boots hit the pier.

The Antarctic summer didn't have days or nights,
but ships and people kept to clock time as best they could.
A pair of old women were awake early
to scrape gene-tweaked barnacles off long strips of plastic they had hung off the piers months before.
Hundreds of little shells glittered with tiny particles of metal they had filtered out of the water.
Ground down and incinerated,
they would yield a few grams of copper or manganese
that could keep some old piece of tech limping along for another season.

One of the women straightened and raised a hand in greeting as Iffy went by.
"Beautiful day," she said. "You headin' into town?"

"Sure am," Iffy nodded,
not wanting to slow down for a conversation.

The old woman nodded back.
"You mind you be careful, aye?
The *Taroona* came in yesterday,
and them pirates been bustin' up ever since."

"Thanks," Iffy said dutifully.
The old woman smiled and bent back to her strips and buckets.

The teens at the head of the pier arguing over how best to hang up a net for mending
glanced at her as she went by but didn't say anything.
Iffy didn't expect them to.
*At least they don't cross their fingers and spit,* she thought,
remembering the times she had tried to make friends with other docksiders.
Sailors were superstitious, and she was a sole survivor.
Nobody looked at her sidelong and whispered
like they had when the loss of her family's ship was still fresh,
but she had learned the hard way that
friends were something that mostly happened to other people.

*Mishra & Co Fine Technical Work - No Job Too Small!* occupied a long shed
that may or may not have been the oldest building in Halley.
The sliding door that took up half its front wall hadn't been opened since before she was born,
so she banged on the smaller door cut into it.

It scraped open on her third knock.
"Hey Jeep,"
she said brightly to the boy scowling at her from inside.
"Is your da here?"
She held up the bent reciprocating rod by way of explanation.

"'s in back," Jeep muttered,
jerking his thumb over his shoulder and making just enough room for Iffy to squeeze past him.

The inside of the shed was a humid mug of long-ago fish,
freshly singed metal,
and the not-entirely-legal coal dust Mister Mishra burned in the furnace
to keep his equipment from freezing in the winter.
Mismatched light squares hung from the ceiling on hair-thin fibers.
The shadows they cast made the compact machines
and shelves of carefully sorted scrap on the shop floor
look like battlebots from old war sims.
Iffy's heart had been in her throat the first time she ventured among them,
but all she saw now was what they could make---what *she* could make.

Mister Mishra was sharpening his fingers on a grinding wheel in the center of the shop.
He nodded at Iffy but didn't speak until the last sparks had flown off his steel nails
and the wheel had come to a halt.
Pulling his safety goggles up onto his forehead,
he tugged the calloused fingers of his real hand through the tangles in his beard.
"Buy, sell, or trade?" he asked.

"Trade," Iffy said.
She held up the bent reciprocating rod.
"Tangled some flotsam comin' in last night.
The engine over-spun before I could get to it.
There's no cracks or nothin'," she added hastily,
handing the piece to him.
"Just needs to be re-angled and annealed."

"Hm."
The wiry machinist turned the rod over in his hands,
sighted along its length,
then held it up to his good ear and tapped it with his metal fingers.
Iffy had seen him go through this ritual more times than she could count,
and still didn't know if the quiet metal *tick* was just a bluff
or if he really could hear flaws too small for eyes to see.

He handed the rod back to her.
"She'll be right enough once she's straightened," he pronounced.
"But it's going to cost you."

The tension eased out of Iffy's shoulders.
Mister Mishra didn't bargain unless he'd already decided that he was going to say yes.
After that it was just a matter of price. 

In the end,
getting the rod bent straight cost her half an hour of sorting scraps for smelting.
It wasn't the machine work she'd hoped for,
but she had learned that if she timed her questions right
he would take a minute here and there to show her
how to dog the belaying plate on the laser drill
or how to line up a set of gatling hammers to rat-a-tat-tat a piece of sheet metal into a graceful springy curve.
She was careful never to stare at the burn scar where his left ear should have been
or at the fractal spider's web of articulated metal that had replaced his left forearm.
She was equally careful not to look up when his son Jeep slouched in
to say that lunch was ready but *amma* said he had to clean up first.

"You hungry?" Mister Mishra asked
as he spun the handwheel on the drill to lift the laser into its locking position.

"No thanks---I brought," Iffy said,
holding up the egg Aunt Naggie had given her.

"Hm." Mister Mishra ran his fingers through his beard again.
"Not much to grow on."

"It'll do me fine."
Iffy nodded toward the laser drill as casually as she could.
"You mind I try a couple of pieces while you're out?"

Mister Mishra shook his head.
"Nuh uh, girl.
Nobody touches my darlin' without I'm here to watch.
You break that,
I'll have to send up to Amundsen for parts,
and odds are they'll have to send all the way up to Taz."

"Aright," Iffy said, feigning disappointment.
"How about I use the mechanical one instead?
Just for learning," she added hastily.
"It's not paid work or nothin'.
I'll just drill some scrap---you can count it all in and out to make sure."

Mister Mishra chuckled.
"No worry about the scrap, girl.
And no worry about gettin' paid.
If you've found work hereabouts that I haven't heard of, more power to you."
He rolled his head to loosen the kinks in his neck
and waggled the digits of his artificial hand.
"Mind your eyes and fingers, aye?"

"Aye," Iffy agreed eagerly.
She had her scavenged safety goggles on her face and the drill bit engaged
before Mister Mishra reached the door.

Drilling holes wasn't hard---she'd learned how to do that long ago.
The hard part was drilling them in the right place.
After examining and discarding half a dozen pieces of scrap,
she found one that was bent enough to be a challenge.

The first hole only took a minute.
It then took her another fifteen minutes to measure,
mark,
measure again,
swear under her breath,
find a pair of calipers in the chaos on top of Mister Mishra's toolbench,
chock the piece,
measure the hole a second time,
and re-align everything juuuuust a little.
A bot could have done the whole job in a millisecond,
but bots could be hacked or infected with malware left over from the war.
"You want it done fast, you use a bot," Mister Mishra always said.
"You want it done *right*, you do it yourself."

Slowly, steadily, Iffy brought the spinning drillbit down
until it just barely kissed the metal and--- "What are you still doing here?"
She jumped and spun around.
Jeep was leaning against a set of shelves,
arms crossed and scowl firmly in place.

"I'm practicing," she said defensively.
"Aren't you supposed to be having lunch or something?"

His scowl deepened.
"Finished. Does my da know you're here?"

"'Course he does."
Iffy scratched a sudden itch on her nose,
then pulled her hand back down to her side.
Mister Mishra *did* know, and she had nothing to be embarrassed about.

"Uh huh. What about your uncle?" Jeep asked,
looking everywhere but straight at her.
"He still bein' trash on you?"

Iffy shrugged.
"Comes and goes."
She and Jeep had talked a few times
when she first started coming to use his father's equipment.
He had shown her a few of his animations
and she had shared a few stories about life at sea,
and for a few fleeting moments she had thought that maybe this time,
but...

The silence stretched uncomfortably.
"I gotta get back to this," she finally said,
waving a hand at the drill press idling behind her.

Jeep straightened up.
"Wouldn't you rather be doin' somethin' useful?"

"This is useful!" Iffy said hotly.
"And it's none of your business what I do or don't."
She turned back to the drill,
placing her foot firmly on the pedal that controlled the motor's speed.

"Didn't say it was my business," he said belligerently.
"But if anything here gets bust up---"

"Anything here gets bust up,
your *da* will know it was me that did it
because it ain't like you ever puts your hands to any of this!" Iffy snapped.
She cranked the drill bit up into its locked position and switched the machine off.
"Here!" Three quick twists undid the chocks that held her test piece in place.
She tossed it at him harder than the distance required,
then took the calipers from the work tray on the side of the drill
and slapped them back onto the bench.
"Gimme a sec and I'll sweep up the shavings for you to weight,
just so you can be sure you got everything."

Without waiting for answer she pulled the goggles down around her neck
and grabbed the old broom that stood next to a broken sonic press like a forgotten sentry.
Jeep watched her sweep,
anger and something that might have been embarrassment written on his face.
"You missed a bit," he finally said,
pointing at a random patch of floor before turning and stalking away.
The door banged behind him.

Iffy emptied the dustpan into the trash and tossed her goggles into her toolbag.
It wasn't fair---Jeep could use the equipment any time he wanted,
but all he ever did was complain and look for ways not to.
The worst thing was,
she knew it wasn't Jeep's fault that he was like this.
Like everyone else in Antarctica
he had been inducted into the Marines when he turned sixteen.
He'd only served a few weeks---just long enough to be sure that the induction had worked---but
having someone else's personality temporarily imprinted over his had changed him.
Iffy missed the sixteen-year-old who had shared his drawings with her.
"He'll come back eventually," Mister Mishra said the one time Iffy broached the subject,
his tone making it clear that she shouldn't bring it up again.
"It just takes some folk longer than others to find their way home."

The sky was the same relentless blue it had been an hour earlier when Iffy stepped outside
with the straightened reciprocating rod safely stowed inside her coat.
She peeled her egg as she hurried up the street toward the grocery store,
trying not to get machine grease on it as she devoured the rubbery white flesh and the warm yellow-brown yolk.
A couple of Aunt Naggie's friends smiled or waved as she went by.
She nodded back,
ignoring the others who shook their heads at the sight of a scruffy little jelly dredger
in a stained coat and boots two sizes too big for her.

A commotion down a side street caught her ear.
Someone was singing off-key.
Another voice joined in, then a third, and then glass broke on stone.
"Bloody pirates," a passer-by muttered to his companion.
"Governors shoulda sunk the *Taroona*, not let she berth."

The second man elbowed him.
"I'm sure the governors know what's best," he said loudly.
Iffy kept her eyes on the cobblestones in front her and hurried on her way.

Sandhu's grocery store was out of eggs.
They had onions,
though,
and a whole case of dried green peppers that had come in from somewhere carefully unspecified.
Little Mrs. Sandhu wrapped half a dozen in wax paper.
"For your beautiful aunt," she said over Iffy's protests,
just as she did every time she gave her something extra.
"And here, take this too.
A little of our special curry mix.
You know how much she likes it."
She handed Iffy a small plastic jar of orange-brown powder.

Big Mrs. Sandhu snorted just as *she* always did.
"You should take your little presents yourself," she scolded.

Her wife smiled.
"*La,* but where would be the romance in that?"

Big Mrs. Sandhu snorted again.
"You just don't want your friends in the harbor to know about each another."

Whatever Little Mrs. Sandhu might have said next
was cut short by a jingle from the bell on the store's front door.
Three heads turned at a cheerful, "Good morning!"
as the squarest man Iffy had ever seen walked in.

"Square" really was the only word for him.
He wasn't much taller than Iffy,
but three of her could have stood side by side in the span of his shoulders.
Strong white teeth gleamed against his black skin when he smiled,
and the small silvery rectangles of tech in his temples
made him look like he had stepped out of an adventure sim.

"Good morning, *sri*," Big Mrs. Sandhu said, bowing her head slightly.
"Is there something we could help you with?"

"Just some advice, ma'am, if you've any of that for sale?"
His twanging accent sounded American to Iffy,
though the only Americans she had ever heard had been preaching in the market
or villains in stories.

"Advice is always free here," Little Mrs. Sandhu simpered,
wiping her hands on her apron.
Big Mrs. Sandhu looked sidelong at Iffy and rolled her eyes.
Iffy bit back a laugh---Little Mrs. Sandhu's flirting was as famous in Halley
as her smuggled vegetables and hard bargaining.

"Excellent," the square man said.
"I'm just in from South Georgia,
and I'm in need of a place to stay for a few days.
I don't suppose you could recommend somewhere that isn't too expensive?"
He spread his hands apologetically.
"It seems that my luggage went missing in transit."

"Oh you poor *cho*," Little Mrs. Sandhu clucked sympathetically.

Big Mrs. Sandhu shook her head.
"That'd be the *Taroona* you came in on?"
When the newcomer nodded she shook her head again.
"They're *bura badi*,
that crew,
pirates and leggers and worse.
You're lucky if all they nickered was your bags and not your kidneys."

The square man sighed.
"That may be, but I confess that I don't feel particularly lucky.
I was hoping to set myself up in business, but without my tools..."
He shrugged sadly.

"What kind of tools?" Iffy asked.
She had been about to slip away---her uncle would almost certainly be awake soon,
and she didn't want to leave Aunt Naggie to deal with his ire on her own.
But tools---that was worth a few extra seconds.

The square man grimaced.
"A couple of half-mil waldoes,
a sintering laser,
a set of diffraction lenses,
a fractal de-ionizer for cleaning the scruff off old cores,
and---"

"There's no such thing as a fractal de-ionizer,"
Iffy cut in scornfully.

The square man blinked.
"Sure there is.
You take the polarizer out of a micromagnetic resonator,
stick it in a high-conductance fractal mesh,
and boom---there's your de-ionizer."

Iffy frowned.
"But wouldn't the resonance feedback slag it?"

"If you're careless, sure," the square man agreed.
"You have to recalibrate the impedance every once in a while so that it doesn't overheat.
But if you have a micropore evaporator---"

"---you can make liquid nitrogen to quench the excess thermal,"
Iffy finished,
the solution suddenly clear in her head.

"Exactly."
The newcomer cocked his head,
looking at Iffy as if she was some strange machine he had to repair.

"Well, if you two are done comparing notes,
there's a couple of places I can point you to,"
Big Mrs. Sandhu cut in briskly.
"Can't promise they'll be as cheap as you want,
but they're clean,
and you won't wake up in the middle of the night with any of your parts gone."

"Thank you," the square man said absently, still studying Iffy.
"And if you don't mind me asking another question,
where did your daughter learn so much about tech?
There are people with a lot of years on them
that wouldn't have thought to worry about the resonance feedback."

"Oh, Iffy's not our daughter,"
Little Mrs. Sandhu said lightly.
"She's crew off one of the jelly dredgers."

"Ah."
The square man nodded as if that explained everything
and stuck out his hand.
"Johnson Wales," he said.
"Pleased to meet you."

Iffy hesitated,
then took his hand and shook it.
"Fifth of Ang Kwan, but everyone calls me Iffy.
Pleased to meet you too."

## Chapter 2

Iffy ran all the way back to the docks,
dodging around the people and bots going about their chores
in Halley's narrow streets.
"*Gardez-vous!* *Gardez-vous!*"
scolded the ancient fixit bot that everyone called French Henry
as she squeezed between its rusty frame
and the rack of insulating moss it was tending.

The barnacle farmers were still bent over their work when she reached the pier.
She stopped and put her hands on her knees to catch her breath.
"How's yer haul?" she panted.

"Not bad," one of them said.
She nudged a scratched blue bucket of barnacles with her boot.
"Prob'ly get thirty grams outta this when it's rendered down.
That'll buy a nice dinner."
Her smile showed more gaps than teeth.

"Good luck," Iffy said.
She straightened up and walked quickly the rest of the way to the *Guinevere*,
her lips moving as she practiced what she was going to say.

Metal clanged on metal as she reached the ship.
"Affin'... shaddin'... dammit!" Uncle Jack swore,
a wrench in one hand and a screw cuff in the other.
Iffy's heart sank.
He was trying to fix the backstay cable she had mended a few days ago.
It was a fiddly job at the best of times,
and if he had a hangover...

The scowl on his face turned stormy as he caught sight of her.
"Where'n the hole you been, girl?" he demanded,
waving the wrench at her.
"There's work needs done!
And don't give me any o' your excuses!"
he continued as Iffy opened her mouth.
"You get this mended and earn your keep or so help me!"

"But---"

"Now!"
Heads turned on nearby ships as Uncle Jack's bellow echoed across the water.

Ears burning,
Iffy climbed the gangplank onto the deck.
Her heart sank a second time when she saw the mess waiting for her.
Her uncle had undone the screw cuff holding the frayed backstay cable together
and trimmed the two ends flat.
He hadn't left enough to weave back together,
not without shortening the cable by half a meter,
so she would have to swap the whole cable for one of the forestays,
which meant an hour at least of unwinding and hauling.

Her uncle crossed his arms,
tapping his wrench against the stained thermal vest
that he had worn for as long as Iffy could remember.
"So where've you been while the rest of us have been workin', eh?"

"Groceries," Iffy said sullenly.
She pulled the mended reciprocating rod out of her jacket and held it up.
"Got this fixed too."

Uncle Jack plucked it roughly from her hand.
"Don't see no groceries," he grumbled accusingly,
squinting at the rod.

"I just asked she to pick up a couple o' things,"
Aunt Naggie said,
sticking her head up through an open hatch
like a turtle cautiously checking that the world outside its shell was safe.
"Did they have eggs?"

"Nope, but I got some peppers."
Iffy fished the items she had bought out of her jacket's deep pockets.
"Oh, and Little Mrs. Sandhu said to give you this."
She held up the little jar of curry.

"Oh, that's kind of she," Aunt Naggie clucked
as she tucked everything into her apron.
"Did you get anything more to eat?
I was going to make noodles."

"It's aright, I'm not hungry," Iffy lied.
"But auntie,
there was a man at Sandhu's,
a mechanic come down to work in the machine shop,
'cept he was on the *Taroona* and they stole his gear.
He was askin' after a place to stay,
an' we got to talkin',
an' he said that if he could get his tools back an' find work an' all,
he might be lookin' for an apprentice."

"An apprentice?" Aunt Naggie echoed.
"Well, good for Jeep.
It's about time he got out and did somethin'."

"Not Jeep!" Iffy exclaimed, unable to hold back any longer.
"Me! I could be his 'prentice!"
The two Mrs. Sandhus had listened with bemusement
as her conversation with Mister Wales---"call me Johnson, please"---leaped from de-ionizers
to different ways to micro-weld the cracked cases of old cores
to the mended reciprocating rod Iffy took out of her coat to show him.
It wasn't until Big Mrs. Sandhu had cleared her throat
and pointedly suggested that the conversation continue
where they *wouldn't* be blocking her aisles
that Iffy had realized how much time had gone by.

Uncle Jack's hand came down heavily on her shoulder.
"You're not gonna be anyone's anything," he growled,
shaking her for emphasis.
"Not 'til you've paid off every last rand you owe us
for lookin' after you all this time."

Something snapped inside Iffy.
"All right," she said coldly,
knocking his arm away.
"How 'bout you an' me go ask the *Ginny* to pull up the accounts
so I can see just how much that is,
and I'll tell you how much you owe me
for keeping this twist of scrap afloat when you're too wrung out to do it yourself,
an' then we'll see who owes who what!"

"What we'll see is how well you swim!"
Uncle Jack roared,
raising the heavy wrench he was holding like a club.

"No!"
Aunt Naggie yanked Iffy back and stepped in front of her irate husband.
"Jack, don't!
She's just talkin'.
She's not goin' anywhere."

Uncle Jack shook the wrench at them.
"I best see more out o' both o' you than just talking," he snarled.
"Now get me some affin' lunch, woman.
And you!"
He jabbed a finger at Iffy.
"Fix that shaddin' cable.
I want us ready to sail tomorrow."

"She'll do it right away, I promise," Aunt Naggie said.
Her arm tightened around Iffy's shoulders,
a silent warning not to say anything.

Uncle Jack stalked off,
muttering under his breath.
"You come below and help me with the noodles,"
Aunt Naggie said,
shooing Iffy toward the open hatch.
"That'll give he time to calm down."

"Yes auntie," Iffy said,
her voice only slightly shaky.
Uncle Jack had never actually hit her---as simple-minded as the *Guinevere*'s core was,
it would still instantly report that to the Marines
who doubled as Halley's police.
But with each passing season,
as the *Guinevere* slowly fell apart beneath them despite Iffy's hard work,
his one-sided discussions of big deals and "if only"
had turned into angry tirades and sullen silences.
Iffy didn't know where she would go,
and she couldn't bear the thought of leaving Aunt Naggie to face him alone,
but she knew that one day soon she was going to walk down the gangplank
and never come back.

One day, but not today.

The *Guinevere*'s galley wasn't big enough for two people to do anything side by side
except get in each other's way,
so Iffy sat at its little fold-down table
and watched Aunt Naggie work with the efficiency of long practice.
Within minutes,
two thinly-sliced onions sizzled in a battered ceramic frying pan
while a pot of desalinated water came to the boil.
A handful of diced mushrooms and a splash of soy sauce joined the onions,
filling the air with a rich aroma that tightened the knot in Iffy's stomach.

The knot turned into an ache as Aunt Naggie added some of her precious spices.
"Is that Mrs. Sandhu's mix?" Iffy asked,
turning a pair of chopsticks over and over in her hands.

"Mm hm."
Aunt Naggie fished the little jar out of her apron,
sprinkled a little into the simmering mixture,
then tucked the little jar at the back of her spice shelf.
"Special flavor for special occasions."
She dropped a thick handful of noodles into the pot,
glanced at her foster daughter,
and added a few more.

Iffy put the chopstick back on the table.
"What's so special about today?" she grumbled.

Aunt Naggie smiled without looking up from her cooking.
"Any time I cook for just the two of us is special," she said fondly,
knocking bits of onion off her spatula into the frying pan.
"But best we don't mention that to Uncle Jack, all right?"

"Sure," Iffy said,
feeling a knot in her chest to match the one in her stomach.
She stood up and hugged Aunt Naggie from behind.
"You know I won't leave you, don't you?"

Her aunt's shoulders slumped slightly.
She moved the frying pan off the induction loop
and turned around to wrap her arms around the skinny young woman
who had somehow replaced the skinny little girl
she had once read bedtime stories to.
"I love you too, *cho*," she said,
kissing Iffy's shaved head.
"But when your chance comes, you take it, aright?"
She squeezed Iffy.
"Now, scootch over."

A few minutes later Iffy sat down on deck
with her back against the wheelhouse door
and a steaming bowl of noodles in her lap.
She bowed her head and said a brief prayer for the olders she could barely remember,
then began scooping noodles into her mouth.
Not even the sound of her uncle grumbling belowdecks
could spoil the spicy sweet taste in her mouth
or the feeling of the knot in her belly slowly relaxing.

When the noodles were gone
she wiped the last drops of sauce out of the bowl with her thumb
and licked it.
The faint tang of machinery and oil from her unwashed hand barely registered.
She sighed.
She would like nothing better than to close her eyes and let the summer sun warm her face,
but the backstay cable *did* need mending,
and it wasn't as if the engine was going to put itself back together---not
on a ship as simple as the *Guinevere*.

She patted her coat
to check that the reciprocating rod was still in her pocket
and hauled herself to her feet.
Down at the base of the pier,
one of the barnacle farmers was balancing a pole across her shoulders
with a large bucket dangling on each end.
The other had stacked the smaller buckets on a two-wheeled cart
and was gently lowering their precious sheets of plastic back into the sea.
They would haul in on the next pier tomorrow,
then the next and the next
until their circuit brought them back to where they had started.
They had been doing it since before Iffy was born.
It kept them fed,
but little more,
and Iffy would be damned and drowned before she would let anything like that become her life.

Without warning a sketch materialized somewhere between her eyes and her brain.
Two toothed wheels to reel in the strips of plastic,
a sharp-edged scraper to pry the barnacles off,
a lens connected to a tiny core set just so in a wire frame
to steer the scraper so that it didn't dig into the plastic...
The whole thing would only cost a couple of rand to make,
and would save the old women an hour or two every day.
Mister Mishra had everything except the frame,
and she could literally see how to print that.
She could actually make it,
she realized with mounting excitement.
She could make it and sell it to the barnacle farmers and---

*BOOM!*
The explosion sounded like someone slamming the world's biggest box down on the world's biggest table.
A roiling mass of smoke billowed up into the sky on the edge of town.
"Oh shad!" Iffy gasped.
That was where the new machine shop was!

A siren wailed.
Others joined it.
She heard Uncle Jack bellow,
"What'n the hole you done now, girl?"
but she was already racing down the gangplank.

By the time she reached the machine shop
a small crowd had gathered on the paved turnaround in front of it.
Something like panic rose in her throat
when she saw that the explosion hadn't been in the building itself
but in the squat blockhouse beside it
where the industrial printer was sitting in quarantine.
One corner of the blockhouse had collapsed
into a tangle of masonry chunks and twisted foam steel beams.

A rough-looking woman in a green and yellow vest
stood in front of the blockhouse's single door
arguing loudly with two men in dark blue Marine uniforms.
"And *I* said I'll open it when my captain tells me to!"
she said hotly,
uncrossing muscular arms thick with tattoos
and the silver tracery of tech.

Two more Marines pushed through the crowd,
sidekick drones whining faintly over their heads.
One of them pointed at the sergeant's stripes on his sleeve.
"Do you see these, citizen?" he demanded.
"These indicate that I have been allocated sufficient authority to direct action
as I think most consistent with regulations regarding general public safety.
We will therefore proceed to inspect this site regardless of your wishes."

The woman's lip curled.
"Consistent with regulations, is it?" she mimicked.
"Well that means nothin' to me, mate,
so you an' your brainwiped friends can---oy!"
She stepped sideways to block a second Marine
as he moved toward the door.

"Clear away! Clear away, all o' you!"
The crowded parted hastily at the shouted order.
Half a dozen sailors pushed through the crowd.
All of them wore variations on the woman's yellow-and-green vest
with *Taroona* stencilled on the back.
"Uh oh," someone near Iffy muttered.

The shaven-headed woman leading the new arrivals put her hands on her hips.
"Y'aright, Bags?" she asked,
glaring at the Marine sergeant, the crowd, and everything else in sight for good measure.

"Kappa, cap'n," the first woman spat.
"Just 'splainin' t' these Blues that there ain't nothin' here needs their look-in."

"With respect, citizen," the sergeant said,
his inducted accent making his calm words ridiculous and ominous at the same time,
"Any potential danger to the residents or property of Halley
is a proper subject of our attention.
Particularly anything that might turn our beloved city into another Bharati,"
he added in something more like a normal voice.

The crowd murmured.
Twenty years before,
someone's home-brew tech had gone up in flames in Bharati.
Dozens had died as fire swept through the small town,
and dozens more from exposure in the days that followed.
Iffy had never asked Mister Mishra about that night,
but every year,
on the anniversary,
he and Little Mrs. Sandhu and their friends gathered at the end of the longest pier in town
to toss handfuls of precious flowers into the sea.

The *Taroona*'s crew ignored the mutters of "Too right" and "Just let 'em look"
from the crowd.
One sailor hefted a gaff hook.
Another wrapped a length of chain around her hand
as the twin or clone beside her revved the motors in her artificial arm.
"Well this ain't Bharati,"
the *Taroona*'s captain said to the sergeant.
"Contract says we're on for mindin' everythin' we hauled down from Taz
'til Halley core tells us otherways,
so whatever happened here is on us t' fix."

The sergeant looked at the debris on the ground.
"Do you regard this as 'taking care', citizen?" has asked pointedly.
The crowd murmured again.

The *Taroona*'s captain crossed her arms.
"That ain't our doin'," she said firmly.
"Printer don't have any feedstock, not yet.
Couldna made a marble, much less a bomb."
She looked up at the drones circling overhead.
"So *I* think this was someone messin' around tryin' t' do us outta bein' paid,"
she said loudly to the city core's eyes and ears.

"I find your diagnosis comforting," the sergeant said.
"But I still insist on inspecting this site directly."
In one choreographed motion,
he and the three Marines beside him
drew their shock sticks from the holsters on their hips.

"Oh shad," someone said quietly beside Iffy.
"It's gonna be an affin' dock fight."

Iffy gulped.
She had never seen a fight worse than teenagers shoving each other,
but Uncle Jack had been in several over the years.
The last time they were in Rothera
he had come back to the *Guinevere* bruised and bloodied
and uncharacteristically quiet about what had happened.
As the Marines' uniform jackets hardened into armor,
she turned to find somewhere safer to be.

And bumped into Johnson Wales.
"'Scuse me," she muttered before she realized who he was.

"No worries," he said pleasantly.
"I was actually just leaving myself.
Here---could you give me a hand?"
Without waiting for an answer
he handed her a bulky black box with a flip-up handle on its lid
and stooped to pick up its two identical twins.

"What---?" Iffy started to ask.

"Ssh!" Wales cut her off and looked up at the drones circling overhead.
Without warning their buzzing stopped.
They dropped out of the sky like rocks.

"Oy, that weren't us!" the *Taroona*'s captain protested,
but it was too late.
As the Marines' sidekick drones clattered and cracked on the cobblestones,
the sergeant blew his whistle.
Moving as one,
the squad charged the sailors in front of them.
Iffy heard the sizzling crack of a shock stick.
Someone shouted an obscenity,
and suddenly people were running past her
as the sailors and Marines did what sailors and Marines have been doing
for as long as there have been sailors and Marines.

"Come on," Wales urged Iffy.
She hurried after him,
the toolbox bumping against her leg.

"Oy!" a voice shouted.
"You there! Where th' hole d'you think you're goin'?"
A rangy man in a yellow-and-green vest with a half-star tattooed on his face
shoved a couple of people out of his way and grabbed Iffy by the arm.

And there it was in her head,
like a wireframe of a machine in a homework assignment labelled with angles and velocities.
Before she even realized what she was doing she spun around,
swinging the toolbox in a sharp arc.
Its rising edge hit the *Taroona* crewman beneath his knee with a crack.

"Aargh! Shaddin' hack, ya wheezy---"
The toolbox in Wales' right hand thudded against the side of sailor's head.
He collapsed to the cobblestones in a heap.

"Run!"
Wales urged as two of the *Taroona*'s crew spotted their fallen comrade
and began shoving their way through the panic to even the score.

Iffy ran,
or tried to,
but the toolbox was heavy and awkward
and the women chasing her were half again her height
and they could knock people aside instead of going around them
or pushing in between them and what had just happened?
How could she have *seen* what she needed to do?

Just as a voice yelled, "Gotcha!" another shouted "*Gardez-vous!*"
Iffy yelped as a tubby rust-stained snake of a bot reared up in front of her.
The sailor behind her skidded to a halt on the cobblestones
and was knocked sprawling as her partner slammed into her from behind.

"Mad bot! Mad bot!"
the second sailor shouted,
dodging back as French Henry waved a heavy manipulator at her.

"Come on!"
Wales pulled her into the scatter of people.

For a few moments all Iffy could do was try not to stumble and fall.
Just when she couldn't hold onto the toolbox any longer
Wales pulled her into a side alley.
A few drops of sweat glistened on his forehead.
"Are you all right?" he panted.

Iffy dropped the toolbox on the ground and doubled over to catch her breath.
"No, I'm not aright," she wheezed.
"I just about got my chomper clocked in a dock fight!
And what's this?"
She whacked the toolbox with the toe of her boot,
something between a prod and a kick.
"This what the *Taroona* bikkies upped from you?"

Wales nodded.
"Everything that matters."
Tiny lights danced briefly across the silvery rectangle in his left template.
He looked up as an angry drone buzzed overhead.
Another followed it a moment later.
"Come on.
The Marines have called for reinforcements---we should be somewhere else when they arrive."

Wales led her out the other end of the alley
onto a narrow street lined with two-story houses made of laser-cut stones.
Blue-green moss that had escaped from some lab traced their mortared joints.
It was strangely quiet after the commotion on the street---the only sounds were the gulls,
the faint whine of a heavy drone passing nearby,
and their boots on the cobblestones.

Iffy struggled to keep up with Wales
as he strode confidently toward the center of town.
The sailors and townsfolk she knew ranged from lean to stringy---cold weather
and the sparse Antarctic diet didn't give bodies much chance to put on weight.
Wales' broad shoulders made him look blocky by comparison,
and the toolboxes seemed much smaller in his hands than in hers.

"Hang up a jif," Iffy finally said.
Wales stopped as she set her load down on the ground and caught her breath.
Between the Marines' inducted fighting skills,
their drones,
and their armor,
the *Taroona*'s sailors would have had about as much chance
as a snowball in Aunt Naggie's frying pan.
"Sometimes people fight just so they can tell themselves they did,"
Aunt Naggie had explained after one of Uncle Jack's misadventures.
"Sometimes trying is the only kind of winning you can hope for."

"*Mon ami! Mon ami!*"
She jumped and squawked as French Henry suddenly rattled around the corner,
its dented old cameras swinging from side to side.
The fixit bot ground to a halt a few meters away.
"*Ça va bien!*" it announced proudly.
"*Ça va tres bien!*"

"What's it saying?" Iffy whispered loudly,
unconsciously backing up a step.
Halley tolerated free bots because they needed their labor,
but there were too many stories of machines being driven mad by malware left over from the war
for people to ever truly trust something as big as French Henry.

Wales didn't seem bothered in the least.
"*Merci beaucoup, mon vieux.*"
He reached into a pocket inside his jacket
and withdrew something that looked like a miniature gray waffle.
"*Ici. C'est à vous.*"

A hatch on the fixit bot's front panel popped open.
A slender manipulator as long as Iffy's arm unfolded
to pluck the object from in Wales' hand.
It was a heat exchanger,
Iffy realized,
a tiny sibling of the one that Mister Mishra had been repairing
the last time the *Guinevere* was in dock.

A blueprint materialized in her head.
The heat exchanger belonged *there*,
in the housing around the fixit bot's tiny quantum core.
Except it hadn't actually been designed to do maintenance.
It was an infiltrator designed to worm its way through sewers and outflow pipes.
Half its parts had been replaced by mis-matched odds and ends taken from other bots
or hacked together out of scrap metal where the tech to make the originals had been lost,
but its original design was still there beneath the patchwork.

Her vision disappeared
as French Henry's slender manipulator folded back into its housing.
"*Merci beaucoup,*" it said,
rocking back and forth in what might have been the mechanical equivalent of a dog wagging its tail
before grinding its gears and rolling away toward the docks
saying, "*Gardez-vous! Gardez-vous!*" once more.

"What was *that* all about?"
Iffy demanded as Wales closed the lid on his toolbox and picked it up.

Wales shrugged.
"Just a hard-to-find part to help an old friend," he said,
sounding fond and sad at the same time
as the bot disappear around the corner.
"Come on---we should get going."

"Uh huh.
Must be pretty affin' hard to find for it to take a chance on bein' scrapped
for scarin' people like it did back there."
When Wales didn't answer she nudged the toolbox next to her with her boot.
"So was that you? The 'splosion back there?"

Wales blinked.
"Why on earth would you think that was me?"

Iffy rolled her eyes.
"'Cuz they upped your gear and then the blockhouse blew up
an' then the bot that takes care o' the town's pipes
just happens to be friend enough o' yours
an' now you got your stuff back?
I ain't *stupid*," she finished disgustedly.
Why did grownups always think kids were stupid?

"No you're not," Wales agreed thoughtfully.
He nodded at the toolbox next to her feet.
"Are you okay to carry that a bit further?"

Iffy crossed her arms in unconscious imitation of the *Taroona*'s captain
and raised an eyebrow.

Wales smiled briefly.
"Sorry.
Arra kappa t' carry at down s'far we go 'long?"

Iffy made a face.
"That was *terrible*," she judged witheringly.
"And sure, but only if I get t' see what's in it."

Wales chuckled.
"Fair enough. Come on."
He glanced up as one last drone zipped past overhead.
Lights sparkled briefly in the rectangle set into his temple,
making Iffy wonder how honestly the drones were reporting the scene
to Halley's central core.

They picked up their loads and walked side by side
behind the Sandhu's grocery
to the café where Wales had rented a room.
The owner glanced from Wales to Iffy to the toolboxes
but said nothing more than, "Tea?"

They sat at the café's single stone-topped table
and sipped the sweet, strong brew from mis-matched ceramic mugs the size of Iffy's doubled fists.
Wales sighed contentedly,
then set his mug aside and opened the toolbox Iffy had been carrying.
"Whoa," Iffy breathed.

Some of the tools looked as good as new,
though they had to be at least a hundred years old---only
a handful of well-defended factories scattered around the world
still had the cleanrooms and nano-fabricators needed
to create marvels like the fractal iridium mesh that
Wales briefly let her inspect
through a monocle made from a single perfectly-formed diamond.
Other tools were clearly cobbled together
from whatever spare parts Wales had been able to find.
Iffy felt more comfortable with these,
since pretty much everything in Halley was built the same way.

"An' what about them?" she asked eagerly,
pointing at a nested set of asymmetric gears
as Wales carefully repacked everything.

The square man chuckled.
"Let's save those for another time."
He blinked as the lights in the tech on his temple flickered with activity.
"The town says the Marines have resolved the situation by the quarantine shed---the
explosion was apparently a result of faulty maintenance
on an outflow pipe that hadn't been registered in the town plans.
Oh,
and the disturbance involving the crew of an unnamed Australian vessel
has been resolved."

Iffy snorted.
"Faulty maintenance my orphaned arse.
I know that was you."

Wales blinked at her innocently.
"I'm sure I have no idea what you mean."

"Uh huh."
Iffy glanced at the timer tattooed on the back of her wrist.
"Oh crivens," she swore,
scrambling to her feet.
She'd been gone nearly half an hour---Aunt Naggie would be worried sick,
and Uncle Jack would be furious.

"Hold on," Wales said, patting the air.
"Just a minute, I promise."
He gulped another mouthful of tea and sat back in his chair.
"Tell me more about this ship of yours..."

Wales locked his toolboxes in his room before they left
and put a small toy bear with bright blue eyes on the shelf above them.
"To keep an eye on things,"
he said,
tapping the tech in his temple.
Iffy nodded---spycams in children's toys were an everyday thing,
even for someone who had grown up as poor as she had.
She didn't know what the orange-and-red globe of Mars next to the bear was for,
but she suspected it would do more than just watch if someone broke in.

A pair of bulky gray drones were hovering over the harbor
as Iffy and Wales walked down to the pier.
"Keeping an eye on the *Taroona*," Wales guessed,
shielding his eyes with his hand to study them.
"Those forks on the front are ultrasonic pulse guns.
One blast from them and you'll have a headache for a week.
And the nozzles behind them probably spray strangle foam."

"Why're they just watchin'?" Iffy asked.
"Why don't the Marines just haul everyone in for th' governor to sort out?"

Wales sighed.
"Politics.
Even if they *did* blow up the quarantine building,
the *Taroona* and the rest of the Aussie fleet
are the only thing stopping the Brazilians from walking in here.
Odds are the captain and her crew will be back on the dock by morning," he concluded,
speaking to himself as much as to the frowning tween beside him.
"Which is another reason I need to talk to your uncle."

"You oughta know he don't keep his word 'less it suits he,"
Iffy warned.
"Or 'less he figures you got some serious haul back o' you."

Wales nodded.
"Thank you---I'll keep that in mind."

Ten minutes later Uncle Jack shouted,
"No affin' way!
We're a jelly dredger,
not an affin' ferryboat!
You wanna hitch up along Rothera,
get yourself three piers over an' buy a ticket."

Wales' polite expression didn't waver.
"I understand it's not your usual line of work," he said smoothly
when the *Guinevere*'s bleary-eyed captain paused for breath.
"And if no is your final answer,
I'll respect that and take my business elsewhere.
But!"
He held up a hand to forestall another explosion.
"What if I could do more than just pay for my passage?"

Uncle Jack snorted.
He had been dozing when Iffy and Wales reached the *Guinevere*,
and from his squint and the smell of his breath Iffy guessed that
she'd find at least one empty bottle in the recycling
if she bothered to look for it.
"Lemme guess---you can sing.
Or no---you can do magic tricks an' turn jellyfish into gold."

"Almost," Wales nodded. "Except it isn't magic, and gold will be all yours."
He tapped the tech in his temple.
"This is a satellite uplink.
A *fully functional* satellite uplink,"
he continued as Uncle Jack opened his mouth.
"Which means I can spot patches of sea boil with half an hour to spare.
Maybe a full hour, if a satellite is in the right positions.
And *that* means---"

Uncle Jack said a word that sent Aunt Naggie's hands flying to her mouth.
"Ain't no such thing," the *Guinevere*'s captain sneered.
"Not since the war---everyone knows that.
The sats are all 'crypted an' the keys are long gone."

"They are indeed encrypted," Wales nodded.
"But not all of the keys are gone---not quite."
He closed his eyes.
"Your beacon is GUIN 40782, is that right?"
He nodded to himself without waiting for an answer.
"Your last trip, you were at sea nine days.
You spent most of it over the Berkner Rise."

"You're trashin'," Uncle Jack contemptuously.
"Everyone 'round here dredges the Berk."

"Some with more luck than others," Wales observed coolly.
"Take the *Whitstable*, for example.
The jellyfish they brought back came up in a boil
just twenty kay northeast of you.
If you'd known it was happening,
you could have been the one to haul them in."

Uncle Jack scowled.
The *Whitstable* was tied up on the next pier,
her captain overseeing a refit
paid for by the hold full of jellyfish she had brought back to Halley
the day after the *Guinevere* had returned.
Her crew had been celebrating their good fortune in Halley's shops and bars ever since.

Uncle Jack scratched his cheek through his uncombed beard.
Iffy could practically hear him resenting the other ship's good luck.
"You're shaddin' me," he growled.
"There's no way you could know somethin' like that 'fore it happened."

Wales didn't answer.
Instead,
he closed his eyes again and pointed toward the *Guinevere*'s stern.
"There's a pair of Aussie freighters a hundred and forty kay that way,
core pilots and human crews,
carrying..."
He paused.
"Profile looks like grain,
but they have something heavier for ballast.
Smuggling in machinery to swap for coal, most likely."
He pivoted twenty degrees like a weathervane.
"The *Peacock*, the *Reculver*, and the *Watney Breach* are dredging together.
They're not going to find much---the sea bottom there
might as well be concrete."
He pivoted again.
"And there's a Brazilian catamaran out that way,
three hundred kay and bearing northwest."
He smiled slightly.
"She looks like an old lady dressed up for church."

He turned back toward them and opened his eyes.
"I can get all of it,"
he said in a voice that left no room for doubt or disagreement.
"Every image, every signal---everything every satellite sees, encrypted or not.
And I need to get to Rothera.
The only question is, will that be your good fortune or someone else's?
It's up to you."

Uncle Jack hefted his gaff hook.
"Jack," Aunt Naggie began.

"Quiet," he snapped, greed and mistrust warring on his face.
"We keep whatever we haul," he finally said.
"An' the moment we tie up,
you're off an' I've never heard of you."

"Fair enough," Wales agreed.
He stuck out his hand.

Iffy held her breath.
Uncle Jack scowled a moment longer,
then grabbed it and gave it a single perfunctory shake.
"I'm guessin' you'll want to be off right away," he said sourly.

Wales nodded.
"Just as soon as I collect my---"
He froze.

"What?" Uncle Jack demanded.
Wales raised a hand for silence, his eyes half-closed.

"Oh no," Uncle Jack blustered,
drawing himself up to his full height.
"You don't shush me on my ship, not 'less you want to---"

"Someone is breaking into my room."
Wales' good humor had vanished.
"Warm up the engines and get ready to cast off.
I'll be back in ten minutes."

"We'll cast off when *I* say!"
Uncle Jack said angrily.

Iffy's heart sank.
Telling Uncle Jack what to do *always* made him do the opposite.

But her uncle's anger had no more effect on Wales
than a windstorm would on a mountain.
"Here."
He pulled a money out of his jacket and thrust it at Uncle Jack.
"A down payment."

Uncle Jack turned the flat plastic rectangle over in his hands suspiciously.
"What's it worth?"

"Six thousand rand," Wales said.

"Six *thousand*?"
Uncle Jack pressed his thumb on the corner of the money.
His eyes widened at the blinking figures it displayed,
then narrowed again as he looked Wales up and down.
"You must wanna get outta here pretty badly,"
he mused.

"It's no use to me if I can't spend it,"
Wales said crisply.
"Do we still have a deal?"

Uncle Jack pocketed the card and grunted something unintelligible.
"Thank you," Wales said. "I'll be quick."
He turned to go, then stopped himself.
"Just so you know, this is still switched on."
He tapped the tech in his temple.
"So if you try to call the Marines, I'll know."

Uncle Jack spat over the taffrail.
"Ain't nobody here calls the Blues," he growled,
for once telling the truth.

Wales nodded and strode down the gangplank,
lengthening his stride into a jog
that carried him along the pier and into town.
"That one's trouble," Uncle Jack said flatly.
He leaned his elbows on the taffrail,
cleared his throat,
and spat again into the water below.
There was more gray in his beard than there used to be,
Iffy thought,
and the three-day fuzz on his shaved scalp
had crept further and further away from his forehead.

Uncle Jack noticed her looking at him.
"Well, get movin'!" he barked,
straightening up.
"An' you too, woman," he added to Aunt Naggie.
"I want us away from whatever's chasin' he soon as he's back."
He strode away,
muttering to himself.

Aunt Naggie and Iffy whooshed out their breath at the same time.
"You gonna tell me what's going on?" Aunt Naggie asked.

Iffy shrugged helplessly.
"I dunno, auntie.
'struth I don't.
There was a fight up along by quarantine,
an' French Henry got into it, and..."
*And all of a sudden I know how to tag someone twice my size,*
she almost added but didn't.
Bots weren't the only ones infected with malware during the war,
and talking about her visions with anyone---even Aunt Naggie---would mean admitting
there was something in her head that shouldn't be.

But something in her expression caught Aunt Naggie's eye.
She put her hand on Iffy's forehead.
"Just be still," she shushed,
stern and worried at the same time.
After a moment she took her hand away,
but her expression didn't change.
"There's no fever.
How about you start getting us ready and I'll make us something quick to eat?"

"Tea would be nice," Iffy said gratefully.

It normally took a full day to get the *Guinevere* ready to sail,
but the money in Uncle Jack's pocket seemed to make him believe it could be done in a blink.
He roared at Iffy and Aunt Naggie to move their sorry sterns,
and no,
don't worry about tyin' that down,
they could do that once they were at sea,
just put it somewhere for now and get the affin' engine goin'!

It took Iffy five minutes of careful work to put the reciprocating rod back in place.
Five more minutes and the engine was chugging away,
biofuel gurgling through kinks in the feed pipe
that Iffy hadn't ever been able to get rid of.
She would normally have checked the winch motor
to make sure they could haul in whatever they caught,
but there wasn't time,
so she laced some straps around the fine mesh nets
they used to dredge for jellyfish
so they wouldn't shift in high seas.
Wait---the fuel hose!
It was still connected to the pump on the pier.
If they had set sail without undoing it,
it would have snapped like an overstretched piece of string.
She had seen that happen once.
It had sounded like a gunshot,
and the end had ripped open an unlucky sailor's cheek.

She scrambled up the ladder that connected the engine room to the deck.
"Ready here," she called.

Aunt Naggie coiled the last stayline and shoved it into a canvas bag,
then shoved the bag into a bench locker and dogged the seat-lid shut.
"That's all for me too."
She handed Iffy half a sandwich---curried egg with more of Mrs. Sandhu's spice mix---and
waited ten seconds for her foster daughter to wolf it down
before thumping the cabin wall with her fist.
"Good when you are," she shouted,
confident as she always was when something needed to be done.

The cabin door flew open.
Uncle Jack stepped out onto deck,
glaring at his wife and foster daughter on principle.
"That's what I said," he told the empty air impatiently.
"Six thousand rand.
I'll have it in a week.
What?
Never you mind how, but that'll more'n put us square.
Right.
Aright.
What?
No, you affin' well better *not* tell she,
or she'll take your skin off an' mine too!
Right.
Aright.
*Vi da*."
He blinked twice to end the call and bared his teeth.

"Who was that?" Aunt Naggie asked cautiously.

Uncle Jack's self-satisfied smile vanished.
"Ne'er you mind," he said brusquely.
"Everythin' stowed?"

"Everythin' that's gonna be," Aunt Naggie said.
"But Jack---"

"I said, ne'er mind!"
He slapped the taffrail with his hand.
"Now where's our high-rollin' troublemaker?"

Five minutes crawled by,
each one tenser than the last,
until Wales appeared at the end of the pier.
One toolbox hung from each hand.
The third was slung over his shoulder on a strap,
and he had a small travelling pack on his back.

Iffy scurried down the gangplank and ran to him.
"Thank you,"
Wales said gratefully
as she took one of the boxes from his hand.

"No worries," Iffy replied.
Then she gasped.
"You're bleeding!"

"Am I?"
Wales pulled a rag out of his pocket,
dabbed at his nose,
and studied the red blotch a moment.
"So I am. Huh."
He put the rag back in his pocket and began limping toward the *Guinevere*.

"What happened?"
Iffy puffed as she fell into step beside him.
"Was someone really tryin' to break into your room?
Were they from the *Taroona*?
Did you get punched up?
An' what's wrong with your leg?"

"Oh, everything was mostly sorted out by the time I got there,"
Wales said vaguely.
"And my leg's bothered me for years.
I keep meaning to get it looked at,
but I never seem to have time.
There's just never enough time," he repeated.

Uncle Jack didn't wait for Wales to stow his belongings
before hauling in the gangplank and casting off.
The engine rumbled and coughed for a moment
as they pulled away from the pier,
then settled into the steady thumping that was as familiar to Iffy as her own breathing.

They were halfway across the harbor
when a klaxon blared *brrrap! brrrap!*
Iffy ran to the stern in time to see
a flock of drones converge on the pier six over from where the *Guinevere* had been berthed.
They swirled in a circle,
careful to keep their distance from one another.

A single ship lay alongside the pier,
long and low and gray and dangerous---the *Taroona*.
Iffy shaded her eyes with her hand.
The ship looked like it was casting off,
but no,
a pair of Marine boats were blocking her path
and a platoon of figures in blue were trotting toward the pier.
She glanced at Wales,
wondering if this was somehow his doing,
but the American's eyes were on the horizon.

They rounded the broken-backed carrier that was Halley's seawall a few minutes later.
The swell beneath them instantly grew stronger.
Uncle Jack took the first watch,
grumbling that if they were hauled in by the Marines
everyone should just let him do the talking.
Aunt Naggie said she would take the second watch,
then shooed Iffy off to sleep.
"You can talk to Mister Johnson in the morning,"
she said firmly.
"Let he have his rest now."
Then she smiled the way she only did
when she and foster daughter were alone together.
"You'll need some too
if you're gonna go chasin' after that special friend o' yours in Rothera."

"Honesty ain't special!" Iffy protested automatically.
Still smiling,
her foster mother pulled her into a hug and kissed the shaven top of her head,
then gently pulled the door of the storage locker closed behind her.

Iffy pulled her nature book out of her mattress
and lay on her stomach to page through it.
The orca, the tiger, the gorilla...
She ran her fingers over the pictures,
sounding out the handwritten comments beside them.
*Mom took us to see the baby giraffes today,* said one.
*There are three of them.
They are all clones and they live in a big dome because of the virus.
Mom says they have been tweaked to be immune to it.*
And then,
in an older version of the same hand,
*Turns out they weren't.
Mom says there isn't money to try again,
so I guess that's it for giraffes.*
And then there was a sad cartoon face,
one of several scattered through the book.

Iffy browsed the other animals,
wondering what it would have been like to live in a world
that had so many different kinds of creatures.
She stubbornly tried to keep her eyelids from closing
until she couldn't remember why they shouldn't.
When she finally dozed, she dreamed.

*She was on deck.
The sky was a perfect blue,
and her olders were stuffing her into her ecosuit.
"Just in case, love," Second said, forcing a smile.*

*But when the ship's horn blared it wasn't a horn at all
but the sound of a drill press.
She was in Mister Mishra's,
fumbling clumsily to reassemble a mound of chips and gears and actuators
that she had never seen before.
Her heart raced as she tried to piece them together.
This rod into that socket---no,
that couldn't be right,
it turned the wrong way and didn't leave enough space for the lens,
because the lens had to go there,
it had to,
she didn't know how she knew but she did and time was running out.*

*And then suddenly she could see the whole design
from the overall schematic
down to the bevelled teeth of the microscopic gears
that would catch and grind on specks of dust too small to see or feel
if they weren't assembled just so in airtight diamond cases.
There and there,
that's where the hair-fine optical fibers had to go,
and there,
right in the machine's heart,
was the space where a miniaturized core could---*

*The whole room heeled hard, throwing her to the floor.
"She's going to blow!" Mister Mishra shouted,
and then all Iffy could hear was a rushing sound
as the ship fell away beneath her into a pit of churning foam.*

She woke up drenched in sweat.
Hugging her pillow to her chest,
she buried her face in her mattress to muffle her sobs.
When they finally ran down she wiped her nose angrily on her sleeve,
rolled over on her back,
and fumbled on the floor beside her for her water bottle
before remembering that she hadn't refilled it.
"Idiot," she muttered,
thumping her fist against her mattress.

It took her a long time to fall asleep again.

## Chapter 3

It was four days to Rothera across the Weddell Sea.
Once upon a time their route would have been choked with ice,
but those days were long gone.
Waves a meter high made the *Guinevere* rock from side to side in a surging rhythm
that Iffy knew as well as she knew her own heartbeat.

After motoring through the bright night of the Antarctic summer,
Uncle Jack ordered the *Guinevere* to raise the sails.
The ship's tiny core obediently ran mis-matched gossamer sheets up her twin Y-masts.
By the time Iffy woke up and wriggled back into her clothes,
Halley had fallen below the horizon.

"Best stay outta his way," Aunt Naggie advised
when her foster daughter clambered down into the galley to get tea.
"He ain't used to havin' folk on board.
I 'spect he'll settle in."
It sounded more like a prayer than a prediction,
but Iffy nodded and climbed back on deck
with two chipped ceramic mugs in her hand.

"'Bout affin' time," her uncle said sharply
when she knocked on the door of the pilot house
and handed his to him.
He slurped a mouthful and set it in the ring next to the ship's wheel.

Iffy glanced at the control panel.
Tiny cameras dotted about the ship showed the engine,
the hold,
the sails,
and practically everywhere else on the ship
except the insides of the cabins and the tiny toilet near the stern.
Small graphs scattered among the images told her at a glance
how much fuel they had,
how much tension was in the forestays and mainstays,
and what the wind and the currents around them were doing.
The most important display was the sonar.
Every captain kept a close eye on that if they wanted to make it home.
At the first sign of gas bubbling up from the ocean floor,
they would fire up the engine and run.

Uncle Jack jerked a thumb at a panel highlighted in orange.
"You get that backstay cable mended soon as you're done here if you want lunch,"
he growled.

"Yessir," Iffy said obediently.
He'd been drinking again, she realized.
She could smell it on his breath,
and from the way he clutched the wheel to hold himself steady
she guessed he'd been at it for a while.

"An' see if that baggage o' yours wants to get started mendin' things,"
he called after her as she turned to go.
"Or better yet, just tell 'im I said he was goin' to!"

Wales had reorganized the ship's other storage locker while Iffy was asleep
to make room for his pack and toolboxes,
then seated himself on a thwart at the *Guinevere*'s stern.
He seemed lost in thought as Iffy approached him,
but said, "Of course," in reply to Iffy's tentative request for help.
Standing,
he straightened his jacket and smiled.
"Being useful would be good for me right now."

"You thinkin' 'bout them off the *Taroona*?
Not that it's any o' my look-in,"
she added hastily.

Wales shook his head.
"No,
I was thinking about the *Landrieu*.
The big ship back at Halley,"
he continued as Iffy gave him a blank look.
"The one the town uses as a breakwater.
She was a marvel in her time.
Fractal carbon ribs,
a foamed poly-composite hull,
and a core smart enough to qualify for citizenship.
She was the first of her kind to sail herself alone across the Pacific,
but then the war came, and..."
He sighed.
"It must have broken her heart to run herself aground."

"I guess," Iffy said to fill the silence that followed.
"Can't imagine how I'd feel if somethin' like that happened to the *Ginny*."

Wales shook his head to clear it.
"Let's hope you never have to find out," he said,
suddenly brisk.
"Now, where's this cable we're supposed to splice?"

Iffy had hoped that Wales would bring out his toolboxes---she
was itching to examine their contents in detail---but instead,
he studied the hacked-off ends of the backstay cable
with a hand-held smart lens
that highlighted the worse of the damage with garish reds and yellows.
Iffy wanted to tell him that the damage wasn't her fault,
but she bit back her words.
There was no way she could tell him that without saying that it had been Uncle Jack,
and as much as she wanted him to think well of her as a mechanic,
no self-respecting sailor would ever cast shade on her captain
in front of a passenger.

"All right," Wales said,
slipping the magnifier back into one of his coat's many pockets.
"What's the plan: splice, clamp, strap, or weld?"

"I was thinkin' I could splice it?" Iffy ventured hesitantly.
When Wales nodded
she fished a roll of twisted eight-gauge cable from her bag of odds and ends
and dug around to find a wire cutter and a pair of needle-nosed pliers.

The next half hour flew by as Iffy lost herself in the task at hand.
She had expected Wales to take charge,
but instead he asked one question after another,
drawing ideas out of her that she hadn't know were there.
It was like the schematics that sometimes popped into her head
but without the gut chill of not knowing where they came from.

Once the first dozen lengths of splice were woven into the cable
Wales sat cross-legged on the deck and held the ends together
so that Iffy could finish connecting them.
She worked as quickly as she could,
waiting for him to say it was time for a break,
but he didn't.
*Uncle Jack wouldn't have been able to hold the cable like
that for more than a minute,* she thought.
Even Mister Mishra would have struggled,
but Wales seemed unbothered.
She glanced at the silver rectangles in his temples
and wondered what other tech might not be so visible.

Over, through, under, through...
"There." She sat back on her haunches.
"Wanna see if it holds together?"

Wales stood,
trapped one end of the cable under his boot,
and pulled hard.
The splice stretched slightly,
and for a moment Iffy was afraid it would give way,
but it held.
"Looks good to me.
Well done."

Iffy shrugged, embarrassed by the praise.
"Only one way t' find out."
She hit the switch on the winch beside her.
The cable zinged as it was wound taut.
Iffy picked up a wrench and whacked the splice a couple of times as hard as she could.

Wales blinked. "Are you always this direct when you're working?"

Iffy grinned. "Pretty much."

There were other things to mend after the cable.
There always were on the *Guinevere*:
a spidery network of microscopic cracks on the forward mast,
a loose coupling on a bilge pipe,
or a handle on the main hatch
that had started sticking mid-way through their last voyage.
Like most of the vessels that called Halley home
the *Guinevere* was more than a hundred years old,
constructed from materials that could no longer be made,
only repaired.
Keeping her afloat was a matter of swaps and trades and patches,
of scouring noticeboards in the jungle
to find tips that weren't self-replicating spamotage left over from the war,
of swapping messages with other mechanics
trying to keep their own ships running,
and of running simulations to see if this patched with that
would hold together in sub-zero temperatures.
In the end,
though,
it always came down to the combination of clever hands,
brute force,
and improvisation Iffy had used on the cable.
She loved it.

Wales worked beside her the whole time,
handing her tools,
holding things steady while she screwed them in
or used her cherished little laser to put a patch on a weld
that held an even older patch in place.
He somehow managed to keep up a steady stream of questions
without ever making her feel like he was pestering her.
She enjoyed every minute of it,
just like she enjoyed the times
when Mister Mishra turned something she'd made over and over in his hands
and pronounced it well done,
or when Uncle Jack was sound asleep
and Aunt Naggie told her stories about growing up in South Africa
in the years after the war,
when fruit still grew on the trees and people could afford to keep pets that weren't rats and reptiles.

Wales seemed to enjoy the work as well,
right up until the moment he helped Iffy lift the cover off the backup generator
near the *Guinevere*'s stern.
His face fell at the sight of its compact, soot-stained bulk.
"Y'aright?" Iffy asked,
fanning away the smell.

"I'm fine," Wales said,
gazing down at the filthy ceramic engine block.
"I just thought you ran on jellyfish sludge, not coal dust."

"The main engine's a jelly-burner," Iffy said.
"This here is just for when it's bust,
or for haulin' the winches when there's ice 'n' all."

The square-faced man sighed.
"But---coal? Really?"

Iffy's eyes widened.
"Oh crivens---you ain't an Eco, are you?
Uncle Jack'll put you o'er the side an' no mistake.
He hates Ecos even worse'n he hates Zillions."

Wales sighed again.
"No, I'm not an Ecologist.
Or Brazilian, for that matter.
I just..."
He squatted on his haunches
and looked resignedly at the engine.
"Come on. Let's get this done."

He asked fewer questions after that,
but despite his obvious distaste
he clearly knew how coal engines worked.
Half an hour after they started,
the lasers that ignited the coal dust it used for fuel
were sparking and zapping in perfect time
and the cinder clog that had been blocking the intake pipe
had finally been dislodged.
She would normally have let the engine run for a few minutes to test it,
but the thought of Wales not saying anything if she did
made her decide to leave it for later.

Aunt Naggie made noodles for lunch.
The smell of synthetic coconut milk,
greenhouse peppers,
diced mushrooms,
and spices made the galley as warm and as comfortable as an old sweater.
"Just for you," Aunt Naggie whispered to Iffy,
spooning a bit of Mrs. Sandhu's special curry powder into her foster daughter's bowl
when Uncle Jack's back was turned.

Wales thanked Aunt Naggie profusely before taking his up onto deck to eat.
"I like watching the waves," he explained
when she protested that the galley could hold four,
it wouldn't be a problem.

"Foolishness,"
Uncle Jack muttered as soon as Wales was gone,
though whether he meant the idea of trying to squeeze four people around the galley's little table
or the idea of watching waves for pleasure
he didn't say.
He stabbed a chunk of mushroom with a chopstick and stuffed it into his mouth.
"I don't like 'im.
Bet there's more'n just the *Taroona*'s crew lookin' for 'im.
Hell,
I bet someone would pay double what he's givin' us
to know where he's at."
He stabbed another piece of mushroom.

Iffy ate in silence, head down.
The safest thing to do when Uncle Jack got a money-making idea
was to wait for it to pass---pointing out the holes in his plan
was the surest way to make him actually do it,
just to prove that no one could tell *him* which way was up.
And while she still knew next to nothing about their passenger,
she had the feeling that crossing him
might actually be the dumbest idea Uncle Jack had ever had.

She and Aunt Naggie cleaned up afterward.
"He seems nice," Aunt Naggie observed
as she scraped the last traces of sauce off a plate into the composter.
"Handy, too."

"Mm hm," Iffy agreed
around one last rubbery noodle.
"Might even be able to talk the core into bein' a little less stupid
if Uncle Jack'll let 'im take a crack at it."

"Oh now, wouldn't that be nice?" Aunt Naggie sighed wistfully.
"No more sittin' up in the middle of the night
wonderin' if the ship's gonna get the notion to head for Argentina or somethin'."

"But then when would you knit?" Iffy asked,
nudging her foster mother with her elbow.
Aunt Naggie blushed.
Her "knitting" consisted of two balls of yarn,
a pair of needles,
and an endless series of romance sims
featuring dashing Zillion smugglers with smoldering eyes
who didn't realize how empty their lives were
until they met the right person,
who was inevitably a poor but honest sailor.
The sims were churned out by a core in Rothera
that had spent the war crafting inspirational propaganda for soldiers and civilians.
Their implausibility and steamy dialogue
only added to the thrill Iffy felt
whenever she managed to get an hour alone with Aunt Naggie's tablet.

"Never you mind about my knitting," Aunt Naggie said primly.
"You're on watch tonight,
so you best get a nap an' I'll wake you in a few."
She kissed the top of her foster daughter's head as Iffy groaned.
"Off with you now."

Wales was back on the thwart at the stern when Iffy got topside,
his empty bowl in his lap.
She hesitated,
wanting to talk but not knowing what to say,
then slipped silently into her converted storage locker.
Taken by a sudden restlessness,
she spent five minutes rearranging her meager possessions
before flopping down on her bed and pulling out her nature book.
The giraffe, the tiger, the wolf with his sad, intelligent eyes...
Someone had written *Looks like Grandad!!!* beside it in tiny curving script.
Iffy had long ago decided that the writer had been a girl about her own age
who had a family and a whole pack of friends.
She closed the book,
tucked it back into her mattress,
and squeezed her eyes shut.

A soft chime in her ear woke her.
She sat up and stretched,
then dug the sleep out of the corners of her eyes.
Her windowless room was completely dark,
but her hands found her clothes on the floor beside her foam slab.
She pulled them on over the onesie she had slept in,
slipped her feet into her boots,
and went out to face another day on the southern ocean.

Aunt Naggie nodded to Iffy when she reached the pilot house.
"Get any sleep?"

Iffy yawned and plopped herself onto the stool beside her foster mother.
"Good enough. How's she doin'?"
She studied the control panel for a moment.
There was a bit too much tension in the mainsail,
and wind drag over the hull was ten percent higher
than the ship's simple-minded core thought it ought to be,
but that was all normal.
She wondered wistfully what it would be like to have tech in her head like Wales
so that she could feel the ship
the way she felt the sun on her face
or the sting of the spray on her skin in a high sea.
She knew it would never happen:
stuff like that had to be implanted at birth
for the brain to learn how to use it.
But she had once paid two carefully-hoarded rand
for five minutes under an induction headset at Halley's midsummer carnival
reliving a glitchy pre-war recording of someone riding a surfboard,
and had fantasized about being the *Guinevere* ever since.

Aunt Naggie nudged her.
"Come about, sleepy head," she chided gently.
Iffy started and straightened.
Her foster mother jerked her chin at the thermos of tea
in the ring holder next to the ship's wheel.
"Fresh made.
Well, fresh-ish," she amended.
"But it oughta keep you through your watch."

"Thanks auntie."
Iffy jerked her chin at the panel
as one of the cameras switched views
to show Wales sitting on the thwart at the stern.
"He been there this whole time?"

"Hasn't budged 'cept to visit the necess'ry," Aunt Naggie confirmed.
"Turned on the sound a while back to ask if he wanted to come an' sit,
but the *Ginny* told me he was talkin' to heself, and..."
She shrugged.
Listening to someone without them knowing was surveillance,
and decent people didn't do that.

"Aright, lemme take over."
Iffy reached past Aunt Naggie
to press her thumb against the dark glass square beside the control panel.
After a moment's hesitation it bleeped and blinked green
to confirm that the ship's core understood a different human was now in charge.

Iffy had scrolled through the core's log many times.
It had been almost sixty years years since it had last been reset
(probably,
she suspected,
because the holds had been full of contraband instead of jellyfish at the time).
Six watches a day while at sea,
with only a couple of weeks a year tied up or idle,
made for almost a hundred and twenty five thousand thumb presses and bleeps.

She had read the highlights of the log
almost as often as she had read her nature book.
Storms, storms, and more storms as the planet warmed up,
some hurling waves taller than the ship's fully-extended mast
to wash across the *Guinevere*'s decks.
Births and deaths and shipboard weddings---Aunt Naggie's parents
had invited a dozen friends on board in Rothera to see her exchange vows with a beaming Uncle Jack.
Pirates, twice, and angry notes about dock wardens who wouldn't stay bribed.
"A whale??" followed by "don't be an idiot",
repairs laid over older repairs like layers of barnacles,
and a one-line entry noting that
the sole survivor of a ship lost to a clathrate blow
had been brought on board.

Iffy gave the control panel a protective pat.
"I gotcha, *Ginny*," she whispered.

She watched through the cameras
as Aunt Naggie trudged back to the cabin she shared with her husband of twenty years,
then stared out at the sea.
The endless light of the Antarctic summer
cut sharp reflections into the waves around her.
She toyed with the idea of playing a sim on the ship's core---a sea monster
with tentacles the size of pier posts,
or a war-time training drill
that would send her dodging and weaving through flocks of hostile drones---but
instead she sighed and pulled up some homework.
Her classroom schooling had finally petered out when she turned ten.
Since then her teachers had been tutoring programs
that she and Aunt Naggie had scrounged, bought, or traded for,
each one guarded by security tough enough to keep out generations of teenagers.
If she didn't do at least a little every day,
Aunt Naggie would sigh and look disappointed,
and she'd rather learn anything---even biology---than face that.

That evening, though, the subject was modern history.
Iffy turned the interaction speed to maximum as the story unfolded.
People burned coal, then oil, then coal again...
Forests were cut down or worn to nothing by drought as the winds shifted...
Fish disappeared as pollution took its toll,
replaced by the jellyfish that now choked the seas...
She skipped over the description of how
warming caused the ancient clathrate ice on the ocean floor to thaw,
sending even more greenhouse gases into the atmosphere.
She knew all she needed to
about what giant bubbles could do to ships unlucky enough to be above them.

She played half a dozen quick "what if?" sims,
doing worse each time.
Fed up,
she closed her homework
and tapped one of the video squares on the control panel.
"Hey," she said,
her heart in her throat.
"Don't mean to interrupt, but I got some questions if you got some time."

The tiny image of Wales turned its head.
"You're not interrupting at all," he said,
speaking directly to the pin-sized camera and microphone
set into the taffrail beside him.
"I'm always happy to talk."

A few moments later he knocked on the pilot house door.
"Permission to come aboard?" he asked,
waiting for Iffy to gesture at the stool beside her before seating himself.
He looked around the pilot house appreciatively.
"She's beautiful, isn't she?"

"She's aright," Iffy allowed proudly.
"Hull still mends itself if we give it time,
an' th' core's mostly holdin' together.
Gotta keep an eye on it, though.
We let it sit too long,
it just stops talkin' to us."

Wales nodded.
"Probably over-cooled.
A lot of people did that to cores when the war started,"
he continued in response to Iffy's questioning look.
"Someone started a rumor that the colder the core was,
the less likely it was to go rogue,
so everyone cranked their thermostats down as far as they'd go
and then forgot they'd done it.
Have you tried putting a twist coil inside the housing
to rebalance the thermal bleed?"

And as easily as that they slid into a conversation
that leaped from
the relative merits of fractal carbon versus foamed aluminum for masts
to tricks for keeping a drill press lined up and steady
when the building it was in was shaking.
Iffy was just about to ask when that would ever actually be an issue
when he raised a hand to stop her.

"Hang on."
His eyes closed as he communed with the satellite passing overhead,
then snapped open.

"We need to change course," he said,
surging to his feet.
"We need to change course *now*."

"What's wrong?" Iffy asked,
but Wales was already gone.
His boots thumped on the deck as he ran sternward
to bang on the door of Uncle Jack and Aunt Naggie's cabin.

"Captain! Captain, I need to speak with you!"
He waited a second, then pounded on the door again.

"Uh oh," Iffy muttered,
watching on the control panel as the door flew open.

"You better tell me we're sinkin', or I'm puttin' you over the side!
I was *asleep*!"
Uncle Jack bellowed.

"We'll be worse than sinking if we don't change course," Wales said,
tapping the tech in his temple.
"A ship just glitched out of stealth about thirty kay behind us.
She's still throwing up a lot of dazzle,
but she's moving fast,
and she's definitely not here for the jellyfish."

Uncle Jack goggled at him.
"Pirates?" he spluttered.

"Only if we're lucky," Wales said grimly.
"We need to change course *now*, captain.
If we head straight for shore
I can put up a bit of dazzle of my own
and try to keep us away from any drones she sends up."

Uncle Jack swore.
"Naggie! Up and movin', woman! We got trouble!"

Iffy had simmed dozens of chases at sea.
Sometimes she was the captain of a customs cutter
trying to catch a school of smugglebots.
Other times she was in command of a Zillion catamaran
skimming across the water under core-trimmed sails
with a hold full of organic food and subversive software.
Some of the sims ran for hours as she played gull and rat
among the jagged rocks of the Antarctic shore.
She had won more than she had lost,
but that was little comfort now that the game was real.

Wales winced but said nothing as the *Guinevere*'s coal engine sputtered to life.
The ship picked up speed
as her propellors churned the sea behind them into a white froth.
Uncle Jack's hands danced across the control panel,
telling the ship's core to tilt the sails all the way to their stalling line
to balance the increased thrust at the stern.
The ship swayed more wildly with each passing wave
as she traded stability for speed.

"Eighteen west, heading one sixty five, at twenty-six kay and change,"
Wales called as he ran to the bow to clip a battered black cylinder to the taffrail.
The ship's control panel wavered and reformed as the gadget powered up
and began spraying misinformation on all frequencies.

"How fast?" Uncle Jack growled.
"Tell me how shaddin' fast, man."

"Twenty kay an hour." Wales hesitated.
"Make that twenty-two.
She's military for sure."

Uncle Jack horked and spat into the garbage pail by his feet.
"Don't mean she ain't a pirate.
Naggie!
Bring me some affin' tea, woman, I got pilotin' to do!"

Iffy stepped out of the doorway to let her foster mother squeeze past her
and hand a thermos to her husband.
She put her arm around Iffy,
but the frightened expression on her face
cancelled out whatever reassurance she meant to give.
Jelly dredgers didn't have much worth stealing besides their ships,
but those ships were worth a lot---enough
for their captains to make a habit of sailing close by each other
whenever strangers were near.
And while Iffy didn't pay any more attention to politics than her homework required,
she knew that the tension between the Zillions
and the governors who ran Antarctica on Australia's behalf
had been getting worse.

"Fifth."
Wales fished a plastic chip out of his pocket and handed it to Iffy.
"In my cabin,
the toolbox with the purple square on the end.
Can you get it for me, please?
Be sure to tap this near the handle before you open the cabin door."

The cold spray thrown up by their speed stung her face
as she ran to his cabin
and tapped the plastic shard on the door handle.
She waited for a click or a tone or *something*.
When nothing came she swallowed hard and,
half-expecting disaster,
yanked the door open.

Wales' three toolboxes lay side by side on the floor.
She lifted the one marked by a purple square,
turned around,
and squawked at the sight of Wales' toy bear crouched on all fours in the doorway.
Its blue eyes flickered.
She heaved a shaky breath and stepped aside.
It scurred across the floor and disappeared into
the odds and ends Wales had strapped against the locker's walls.

She hurried back to the pilot house,
the toolbox bruising her thigh with every second step.
"How we goin'?" she asked.

Wales shook his head as he took the toolbox from her.
"She hasn't changed course.
Either she doesn't know we've spotted her or she doesn't care."

"Or she's jus' waitin' 'til we're in closer to shore,"
Uncle Jack growled.
"She's got dazzle enough t' cover the both of us
if she gets us up against th' rocks."
He swiped two fingers across the control panel
in an angry, futile attempt
to squeeze a little more speed out of the *Guinevere*'s struggling engine.

Wales hefted his toolbox.
"I might be able to do something about that.
Excuse me."
He squeezed past Iffy and Aunt Naggie.

"You go lend 'im a hand,"
Aunt Naggie told Iffy in a low voice.
"I'm goin' to make some more tea an' put some food together.
No sense bein' sunk on an empty stomach."

"Ain't nobody gonna sink us," Uncle Jack snapped
without taking his eyes off the control panel.
Aunt Naggie shooed Iffy out of the pilot house without replying.

Wales was on one knee near the bow beside his open toolbox.
The half-assembled drone in his hands
was the same size as the toy bear in his room
but skinned with camo
that changed color to match his hands and coat and the deck
every time he turned it over.

Using a pair of diamond-tipped tweezers,
Wales detached a manipulator as thin as a drinking straw
and placed it carefully back in the toolbox.
"Have to cut the weight," he explained to Iffy without looking up.
"We're going to need all the range we can get."

He removed the drone's other tiny arm and stowed it beside its twin,
then handed the compact little machine to Iffy.
"Probably best if you don't tell your uncle about this part," he said quietly
as he used the nail of his left thumb
to peel the false skin back from the pad of his right forefinger.
Underneath lay a small patch of silver
whose lights blinked in time with the larger square set in his temple.

Iffy gasped. "Are you trans?"

Wales glanced at her, a wry smile on his face.
"You know, that used to mean something very different than it does now.
But no, I'm not transhuman.
I just don't like advertising how much tech I have in me.
It's hard enough having people try to cut my head off every once in a while---if
I had to worry about waking up minus a finger or two I'd never get any sleep."

He pressed his silver fingertip against the side of his toolbox.
"Sixteen orange kneecap," he said quietly.

Iffy held her breath,
half-expecting the toolbox to transform itself into---well,
she didn't know what, but *something*.
Instead,
a tiny blue light blinked twice in the handle.

Wales took a deep breath and lifted the toolbox's inside
to reveal a shallow compartment in the bottom.
Nestled among the tech hidden there
were half a dozen small cylinders,
each the size of Iffy's little finger.
Four empty holes showed where others had once been.
Using his tweezers once again,
Wales plucked one of the cylinders from its resting place
and inserted it into the base of the drone.

"Battery?" Iff guessed.

Wales shook his head.
"The drone's battery is built in.
This is...
This is just in case."
He reassembled the bottom of the toolbox and tossed the drone into the air.

It rose, started to fall, and then---Iffy blinked.
She couldn't see any rotors or hear any buzzing or whining.
The drone just *floated*,
its sides shimmering slightly as if it were a hologram.

"It's covered in ionizing impellers,"
Wales explained before Iffy could ask.
"They were meant for Mars,
but they work in our atmosphere too."

Before Iffy could ask how a drone built to explore Mars
wound up in a toolbox in Antarctica,
Wales pointed his silver-tipped finger toward the horizon.
With no more command than that,
the drone shot away and disappeared from sight
as its camo matched the blue, gray, and white of the sky, sea, and waves.

Wales locked his toolbox and stood up,
folding the false skin back in place over his fingertip.
"Let's watch from inside."

Uncle Jack was chewing the end of his beard as they entered the pilot house.
"Well?" he demanded.

Instead of answering
Wales pressed his palm against the nearest corner of the control panel.
The images from the ship's cameras slid aside to make room for a larger one.

Seen from on high through a fisheye lens,
the ocean looked like a crumpled sheet of gray plastic.
The irregular lines running diagonally across it were wave crests,
and the speck near the bottom was the *Guinevere*.
There was nothing around them but emptiness.

"Have you sent a distress call?" Wales asked quietly.

Uncle Jack scowled.
"Nearest shout I got back is a hundred kay east,
but they're smaller'n we are an' too scared to fight.
Halley wasn't much interested 'til I told them our friends looked military.
Then they made noises about lookin' into it and dropped off comms.
And then the shaddin' *comms* dropped off."
He jabbed a finger at a small image in the corner of the control panel
that was blinking an orange warning.
Whoever was hunting them was blocking their transmissions.
They were on their own.

"All right, let's get a look at you," Wales said under his breath.
He slid his hand across the control panel again.
The scene shifted as the drone tilted its camera forward and narrowed its focus
to zoom in on a dark blur on the ocean below.
Its outline remained blurry even as it grew larger.
That was its camo,
Iffy guessed---thousands of micro-thin strips of smart material
absorbing and re-emitting light,
infrared,
radar,
and everything else that might give reveal the ship's position and profile.
The flurries of multi-colored speckles
that swept across the image every few seconds
were the camo's electronics at work,
doing for the intruder what she hoped Wales' gear was doing for the *Guinevere*.

Even blurred,
the ship was a frightening sight,
long and lean and four times the *Guinevere*'s size,
the narrow V of her wake betraying the power of her engines.

"Saints and their mercies!"
Aunt Naggie exclaimed from behind Iffy,
a tray of tea mugs in her arms.
"That's the bloody *Taroona*!"

As if in answer a splash of text began scrolling next to the image.
*Glenunga*-class combat transport...
active keel...
modified infrared profile...
modified camouflage...
The words solidified into a spider-web of facts and guesswork
as the *Guinevere*'s core tried to make sense of what it was seeing.

Iffy opened her mouth to ask Wales
if the Australians were after him or the gear in his toolboxes,
then closed it.
Now wasn't the time,
especially not with Uncle Jack there.

"How fast can that thing of yours move?"
Uncle Jack asked as the ship swelled on the screen.

"Mach three and change," Wales replied. "Hang on."

The image tilted and swooped as the drone dove toward the sea below,
levelling off at the last moment to skim the tops of the waves.
A trio of graphs appeared at the top of the control panel.
Wales cursed under his breath.

"What now?" Uncle Jack demanded.

"Some kind multipath radar rig," Wales muttered.

"Is that bad?" Iffy asked anxiously.

"It means they can tell someone's looking at them,
but they can't have a lock.
I hope," Wales amended grimly.
"And there she is,
the pride of the Tasmanian fleet."
The *Taroona*'s outline suddenly came into focus
as the drone got close enough
for its tiny core to see through the ship's dazzle.

"Murder in high heels an' a corset is what she is," Uncle Jack growled.
The stubby frames of railguns bristled at her bow and stern.
The large tube amidships had to be some sort of EM pulse cannon,
Iffy guessed---at least,
that's what it would be if this was a sim.
But the most frightening thing was what *wasn't* there:
no flag,
no call numbers,
nothing to give her any sort of identity.
Not even her name,
so defiantly displayed when she was tied up in Halley.
She was hunting now,
not swaggering.

Without warning the display went blank.
"What now?" Uncle Jack demanded as the image re-formed.

"Laser burst," Wales said curtly.
"The drone's core is shielded,
but another hit like that will fry the ionizers.
No way they did that from so far out.
They must have a shark in the water
or something in the air I can't spot.
I'm going to pull back."
Even as he spoke, the *Taroona* began to dwindle.

"Dammit!" Uncle Jack slapped the controls in frustration.
"There's no way we can outrun them."

Wales drummed his fingers on the control panel.
"Maybe we don't have too."
A swirl of false-colored oranges and pinks bloomed on the control panel.
A heavy line marked the shore
and a pair of dots marked the *Guinevere* and her pursuer.

Wales pointed at a splotch of pink between the two dots.
"There---there's a ridge about two hundred meters down.
Seismology detected a mudslide this morning,
and there's been bubbling since."
He glanced at the *Guinevere*'s captain.
"It's a sea boil waiting to happen," he translated.
"If it blows, it'll slow her down or scare her off."

"If?" Uncle Jack spat.
"If don't help us now!"

"Leave that to me," Wales said.
Thin white lines appeared and disappeared on the display
as he and the *Guinevere*'s core explored a thousand possible futures.
After a couple of seconds
their criss-cross confusion locked into place.
Wales tapped the image.
"That's our best chance.
Head for these coordinates.
I'll update them as I get more data from the drone."

"It's affin' madness to be steerin' *into* a boil," Uncle Jack grumbled
as he bent the *Guinevere*'s path to port.
He grabbed a sandwich from Aunt Naggie's tray
and gobbled half in a single hasty bite,
chasing it down with a gulp of tea and a belch.
Wales took a second ceramic mug and sipped its contents.

Aunt Naggie handed Iffy the third.
"I'll be down in the galley," she said.

Uncle Jack eyed Iffy,
clearly expecting her to follow her aunt,
but said nothing when she stayed.
Her tea tasted metallic in her mouth.
It took her a moment to realize that she had bitten her lip.
Her heart was pounding.
This wasn't a sim.
This wasn't anything like a sim.
This was *terrifying*.

Wales grunted beside her.
"She's turning faster than I expected.
I'll update the model."
The white lines on the screen danced and twisted again,
settling quickly back into a pattern as confusing as the original.

Wales grunted again.
"Four minutes to optimal position.
Assuming they're not skewing the sat nav to throw us off track."

Soft green digits in the corner of the control panel counted down the seconds.
The tension in the pilot house stretched
until Iffy thought it would snap like a rubber band.
Uncle Jack's knuckles were white on the wheel,
and she couldn't quite seem to catch her breath.
Even Wales seemed to feel it.
He flew the drone in a back-and-forth sweep,
never too far in front of the Aussie warship
but never letting it close in enough to take another shot with its laser.

Three minutes.
Two.
One.
"Show time," Wales said quietly.
He bowed his head as if in prayer.
The image on the screen steadied as the drone slowed and stopped.
The Aussie ship drew closer,
gray and single-purposed like the shark in Iffy's nature book.

The map on the control panel tilted to show depth.
The ridge on the sea floor lay directly beneath the drone,
orange splashed with warning pink.
"Ten seconds," Wales said.
Before Iffy could ask, "Until what?"
the drone dove straight down into the water.

The image from its cameras dimmed and went black
as the drone left the light behind.
Two white sparks appeared on the map next to *Taroona*
and sped toward the blue dot that marked the drone's position.
"*Ta ma dé*," Wales swore.

The drone plummeted toward the sea floor as the *Taroona*'s torpedoes closed in,
finally able to get a lock on their target from its trail in the water.
"C'mon c'mon c'mon," Iffy pleaded,
not realizing she was speaking aloud.

The drone's dot disappeared.
A balloon of red light expanded where it had been
as the finger-sized bomb it had carried did what it had been built to do.
The torpedoes tried to curve away, but it was too late.
Their trajectories disappeared as they intersected the expanding violet blob.

And then the blob touched the sea floor.
The pink blotch beneath it writhed like like a living thing.
Graphs flashed onto the screen,
probability surfaces dancing in three dimensions
as the *Guinevere*'s core tried to predict what would happen next.

"Oh hell," Wales said softly
as a section of the sea ridge started sliding slowly into the depths.
Blue fissure lines flashed along the edges of the mudslide like lightning,
their bright lines connecting and spreading in a sudden spiderweb fracture.

"Come about," Wales snapped at Uncle Jack. "Now!"

The *Guinevere*'s captain didn't need to be told twice.
"I told you this was a stupid idea!"
he snarled as his hands danced across the controls.

Iffy grabbed the door frame to keep her feet
as the *Guinevere* heeled over to starboard.
"What happened?" she asked.

"Fault line in the ridge," Wales said angrily.
"It wasn't in the survey data and the satellite couldn't see it.
The last bot to scan that area must have---"
He cut himself off and pressed his hand onto the control panel.
The map and graphs were replaced by a grainy image
that zoomed in to show the now-familiar outline of the *Taroona*.
"Hang on!" he ordered as the sea behind them started to bubble.

Iffy couldn't look away.
The mudslide started by the bomb the drone had been carrying
had broken up a field of barely-frozen clathrate ice,
releasing enormous bubbles of methane.
As they rose to the surface they churned the sea into
a froth unable to bear the weight of a ship.

Too late, the *Taroona* realized the danger beneath her.
Her stern dipped, throwing her bow into the air.
She tipped on her side and slid down into the dark unforgiving ocean.

"Saints and their mercies," Uncle Jack said quietly.

But no---there she was, still afloat!
She wasn't a jelly dredger or a cargo hauler.
She had been built to withstand gunfire
and scalpel mines
and the storms of the great southern ocean.
She bobbed and wallowed like an oversized bath toy,
her deadly grace gone,
but as the water that had tried to claim her sluiced off her sides
she turned toward the *Guinevere*.
Twin jets of white steam spurted from her stern as her engines briefly lifted above the waves,
and she surged forward once again.

"Crap," Wales said under his breath.

Uncle Jack said something louder and much worse.
"I knew you were trouble!" he snarled at Wales
as he reached for the control panel.

Wales caught his wrist.
"What are you doing?"

"Cuttin' the affin' engines!"
Uncle Jack yanked his arm free,
as angry Iffy had ever seen him.
"You can't sink 'em and we can't outrun 'em
so the only thing we got is to run up the white flag
and hope you're all they take!
And if you ever lay hands to me again on *my* ship, I'll---"

*BOOM!*
Yellow-red flame jetted from the *Taroona*'s side.
Iffy shrieked as a second blurred streak hit the Aussie ship,
then a third,
each striking right at the waterline.
As the *Taroona* shuddered under the force of the blows,
an explosion inside the ship kicked her sideways like a child's toy.

"Ya killed 'em,"
Iffy whispered unbelievingly
as the *Taroona* broke in two.
She dragged her sleeve across her face.
"Ya killed 'em all.
Why'd ya do that?"

"That wasn't me!"
Wales' hands danced across the control panel.
"Damn it!
I need to get another drone up there."

"No you don't," Uncle Jack said flatly, pointing out the window.

A ship had appeared out of nowhere,
its camo briefly disrupted by the missiles it had launched.
Where the *Taroona* and the *Guinevere* were metal,
the newcomer was made of tweaked bamboo.
Her dozen sails were a tangle of fractal geometry
too complex to be managed or even really understood by a merely human mind.
Her green and yellow pennant with the slogan *Este mundo é de deus*
proclaimed to all who she was,
while her railguns and missile racks said just as plainly what she had been built for:
war.

"Zillions..." Iffy whispered.
Everyone knew the words on that flag---knew them and feared them.
Brazil had fought beside the rest of humanity when the machines rebelled,
but had turned on their allies once the bots were defeated.
"*Este mundo!*" they screamed in sim after sim,
always the villains.
"This world is God's!"
The earth's self-appointed defenders would sacrifice everything
to undo the damage humanity had done to the Earth.
Whenever a shaft in a coal mine collapsed
people blamed Zillion saboteurs.
When a mutant fungus turned the contents of a greenhouse into sludge,
all its owner had to do was say,
"It must have been them!"
for people to demand that the governors *do* something.
And when a Zillion trader was brave enough or stupid enough
to go more than a block or two from Halley's market on their own
and woke up in hospital,
everyone just nodded at the Marines' straight-faced apologies
for the inexplicable glitch in their drones oversight
that left them unable to identify anyone who might have been involved.

Even as they watched,
the Zillion ship blurred and vanished once again.
The faint spiderweb tracery of her rigging glinted in the sun,
then it too was gone.
"Why'd they---" Iffy felt lightheaded.
"Why'd they kill 'em?"

"Because they could," Wales replied wearily.
"There's no way they could get past the *Taroona*'s defenses
when she was running at spec,
but knocked off balance the way she was..."
He shrugged.
"They saw a shot and they took it."

"A shot *you* gave 'em," Uncle Jack said accusingly,
quick as always to make sure trouble was someone else's fault.
"There's gonna be hell to pay for this."
He slapped at the control panel to put the *Guinevere* in a tight turn.

"Wait---no! We can't go back for them."
Wales reached for the panel.

Uncle Jack slapped his hand away.
"I'm not leavin' 'em in the affin' water!"

Wales shook his head.
"Look."
Another pink blotch was rising from the ocean floor on the panel in front of them.
It churned and reformed
as the *Guinevere*'s simple-minded sonar tried to make sense of a maelstrom of bubbles.
When it reached the surface the broken remains of the *Taroona* disappeared.

Uncle Jack swore again.
For a moment Iffy thought he was going to hit Wales.
Instead,
he swiped his hand across the control panel to turn them back toward Rothera.

All of a sudden Iffy needed to be somewhere else---anywhere else.
She threw open the door of the pilot house
and stumbled out into the endless hard light of the southern summer.
Her feet took her to the galley on auto-pilot.
She pulled open the hatch and fell into her foster mother's arms.
Aunt Naggie wrapped her meaty arms around her adopted daughter.
"Sweetie, what's wrong?"

"They're dead," Iffy cried.
"They're all sunk an' dead!"

"Oh, sweetie."
Aunt Naggie hugged her tight, rocking her from side to side.
"Oh, sweetie..."
For a moment Iffy thought she heard another voice say,
"I love you so much,"
but no.
There were just her sobs
and the hum of the engines
and the muffled sound of the uncaring sea.

## Chapter 4

Her tears eventually stopped, as tears always do.
After one last hug from her foster mother,
Iffy left Aunt Naggie in the galley
and sat on the thwart at the *Guinevere*'s stern,
gray thoughts chasing each other aimlessly in her head.
She half-hoped that Wales would sit beside her so that she could be curt to him,
but instead he disappeared into his cabin,
ignoring Uncle Jack's angry questions about
what the hell a civilian was doing with a bomb in his affin' luggage.
*Wait 'til you find out about the other ones,* she thought dully.

Sunk in misery,
it took her a moment to realize that something was moving above the horizon.
She stood and shaded her eyes,
squinting against the dazzle from the waves
until she was sure she was seeing the wispy smudge of a spotter drone's gossamer wings.
Why was it approaching from the west?
Halley lay east of them.
Unless---
"Uncle Jack!" she shouted,
sprinting toward the pilot house.
"Uncle Jack, it's the Zillions! They're comin' back for us!"

"Hang about a sec," her uncle said
to a face on to the control panel as she charged in.
"What?"

"Uncle Jack," she panted.
"There's a Zillion spotter comin' in!"

"That ain't Zillion," her uncle said scornfully.
"It's outta Rothera."
He jerked his thumb at the face on the screen.
"Lady here says they been lookin' for us.
Or leastways, they been lookin' for our passenger.
Seems he's quite a popular fellow."

Iffy looked from her uncle to the screen.
An old woman smiled back warmly.
Her brown face was lined with a century of wrinkles,
and what was left of her hair
was pulled back tightly in a bun
in a style that Iffy had only ever seen in history sims.
"Hello," the face said.
"You must be Miz Kwan.
I'm Doctor Johel.
I'm looking forward to meeting you."

They reached Rothera two days later.
The spotter traced lazy circles above them the whole way,
its insect-eye cameras and microscopic core
searching ceaselessly for signs of trouble.
Each time Wales emerged from his cabin
to get some tea or use the toilet,
it swooped closer to the *Guinevere*
like a gull that had spotted someone eating a sandwich.

Uncle Jack grumbled ceaselessly about surveillance
and how the governors shouldn't be allowed to get away with it
but what could decent hard-working folk do when the game was skewed against them?
Aunt Naggie went from her cabin to the galley and back again with hurried steps,
head down,
uncomfortable but bearing it in silence the way she bore so much else.
Wales paid no more attention to it than he did to Iffy and her foster parents.
"Good morning", "excuse me", and "no thank you"
were all he seemed to have the energy to say.

But Iffy was fascinated.
Skies the world over had been off limits since the end of the war:
even the machines couldn't watch the whole world all the time,
but anything moving too quickly or bigger much larger than a single person
ran the risk of being fried from orbit.
A few heavily armored aircraft still flew short missions here and there,
but for most of humanity,
anything more than a short ground-hugging flight
had once again become the stuff of dreams.
The spotter drone was the biggest winged craft Iffy had ever seen up close---she spent
every moment she could steal
studying it through a high-powered monocular.
Truth be told,
there wasn't much else to do.

They threaded their way through the narrow passage
between Adelaide Island and the Antarctic Peninsula,
past drifting mats of tweaked seaweed left over from someone's failed attempt to start a sea farm,
and there it was:
Rothera.
The capital of Australia's Antarctic territory
was ten times the size of Halley,
home port for the fleet that glared at the southernmost tip of South America across the Drake Passage
and at the Zillion marauders who used it as a base.

A pair of sleek sentry torpedoes surfaced beside them
as they rounded the rocky point
where the scavenged remains of the first research station stood.
Normally bustling with warships, freighters, jelly dredgers, tugs, and water taxis,
Rothera's harbor seemed unnaturally quiet.
"Governor's orders," Aunt Naggie told Iffy,
passing her a hard-boiled egg liberally dusted with curry powder.
"That's what Jack says---everyone's been told
to stay outta the way 'til we tie up.
Whatever Mister Wales did scared 'em all pretty hard."

Her meager lunch inside her,
Iffy went back on deck.
She was surprised to see Wales leaning on the taffrail,
his eyes as distant as his thoughts.
Iffy hesitated,
thinking about all the times she'd tried to make friends with people
only to put her foot in her mouth,
then stepped up to the taffrail a meter away from him and leaned on it as well.

He looked sideways at her.
"I'm sorry for what happened."

"No worries," she said.
Together, they watched the shore approach.

"You will never find a more wretched hive of scum and villainy,"
Wales sighed.

Iffy bridled. "It ain't that bad."

Wales chuckled.
"It's a quote from an old sim.
And no, it isn't that bad."
His half-smile slipped slightly.
"Or at least, I hope it isn't."

Thin trails of soot drew diagonal charcoal lines across the sky above the city
as the *Guinevere* approached.
Iffy glanced at Wales,
but he showed no emotion at the sight.
The Peninsula's coal mines were the original source of Rothera's wealth,
the reason both for one of the governors being there
and for the Zillions' prowling and raids.
It was a crime to burn fossil fuel everywhere in the world that still had laws,
but when pressed about their seemingly endless exemptions,
most of Rothera's citizens would shrug and say, "Damage done,"
or pointed out that the whole of Antarctica would still be covered in ice
if it weren't for the warming.
And if cities elsewhere had drowned
and people had starved
or been driven from their homes in the years before the machine wars,
well,
that damage was done too.

When the wind shifted,
the city's smell hit Iffy like a wet hammer.
Rothera didn't just have coal mines---it had a dredging fleet too,
and rendering plants to process what they brought in.
The reek of tonnes of jellyfish being turned into fuel and fertilizer
was like being hit hard with a pillow.
Wales wrinkled his nose in disgust,
but Iffy took a deep breath,
held it until she thought her lungs might burst,
and let it out in a whoosh.
That stink meant Rothera,
and Rothera meant Honesty,
and Honesty meant---well,
Iffy was still trying to work exactly what Honesty meant.

The torpedoes peeled away as they entered the harbor
to resume their endless patrol.
The spotter drone overhead banked and turned back out to sea a few moments later,
the sun sparkling off the solar cells in its wings.
Iffy watched it go,
wishing she too could watch everything
with the detachment of an angel or a satellite.

A squad of Marines was waiting for them on the pier.
Four stood in a semi-circle around the old woman who had spoken to them two days earlier.
An armored bot the size of the *Guinevere*'s pilot house loomed behind them.
Someone had turned the "0" of the "G-80" stencilled on the bot's side
into a scowling face.

The rest of the Marines were scattered among crates and machines
or on the decks of nearby ships,
their positions chosen after a millisecond of high-intensity simulation by the city's core.
Other than them the pier was deserted.
So were the piers on either side, Iffy realized.

"Sharks in the water," Wales murmured beside her
as a mechanical shape twice the size of the sentry torpedoes swam beneath them.
"And that G-80 on the pier isn't just for show."
He nodded almost imperceptibly toward the hulking bot.
"See its treads? They've been reinforced for urban work."
He looked past Iffy as Aunt Naggie came on deck
to put her arm around Iffy's shoulders
and gave her foster daughter a wordless squeeze of reassurance.
"I'm sorry for all this."

Aunt Naggie shrugged.
"Prob'ly be sorrier if we were dead."

The *Guinevere* slowed and turned parallel to the pier.
Iffy shrugged off her aunt's arm
and hurried forward to throw a line to a waiting Marine.
As he caught it,
another Marine leaped across the gap to the *Guinevere*'s stern.
Despite the weight of his exoskeleton,
his boots made no more sound hitting the deck than a seagull flapping its wings.

Uncle Jack strode onto the deck and put his hands on his hips.
"Well," he said to no one in particular,
standing a little straighter than usual
in a bright orange suit jacket that had probably fit him well twenty years ago.
"Let's get this over with."
With one final glare at Wales
he let the gangplank thud onto the pier
and stumped down to meet their welcoming committee.

Wales stepped aside to let Aunt Naggie follow her husband
and then picked up the toolbox with the purple square on the end.
"How about you bring those?" he said to Iffy,
nodding at the two remaining toolboxes.
"And stay close---as long as we don't startle anyone,
everything will be fine."

Iffy hesitated.
"It's normal for an apprentice to carry their teacher's gear,"
Wales explained gently.
Iffy nodded jerkily and followed him down the gangplank with one box in each hand.

Doctor Johel stepped forward to greet them.
"Johnson," she said warmly,
extending her hand.
"Such a pleasure to see you again."
Her clipped accent was straight out of an old story sim,
and her eyes actually sparkled as she and Wales shook hands.

"And you, doctor."
Wales bowed his head slightly before releasing her hand.
"My apologies for the trouble I must have caused."

"No apology necessary," Doctor Johel said briskly.
"Pirates are pirates no matter whose flag they fly,
and it's useful to know
that the Brazilians are able to get that close without being detected."

Wales inclined his head again.
"As you say." He hesitated.
"Do you know how many were lost?"

The tiny woman's expression didn't soften.
"I'm afraid not.
And even if we did,
Intelligence might not share that information."

"And Miz Kwan," she continued smoothly,
turning to Iffy and holding out her hand again.
"A pleasure to meet you as well.
I'm grateful to you for helping Mister Wales get here in one piece."

"No worries," Iffy mumbled,
setting down the toolboxes and shaking Doctor Johel's hand gingerly.
The old woman was half a head shorter than Iffy,
and her wrinkled brown skin felt like warm plastic.
Up close,
the sparkle in her eyes was more than just a trick of the light,
but Iffy couldn't tell if she was tweaked
or if the gleaming motes were some kind of tech.

"And I'm Jack Ng, thank you for asking," Uncle Jack broke in,
stepping forward and thrusting out his hand.
"I'm the captain of the *Guinevere*,
an' what I want to know is,
how soon can I get back on th' water where I belong?"

"I'm sure the governor will tell you that when you see him,"
Doctor Johel said,
pointedly ignoring his hand.

"When I what? I'm not---will you stop pesterin' me, woman?"
He shrugged Aunt Naggie's cautioning hand off his arm angrily.
"I'm not talkin' to th' governor!
I was hired for a job, plain an' simple.
I just want paid an' then I'm done with it."

"That will be for the governor to decide,"
Doctor Johel said,
a hint of steel in her voice.
"Now, if you'll come this way?"
She turned toward shore.
The armored bot pivoted smoothly on its heavy treads
and lowered one of its arms.
The elderly doctor sat on it as if were a park bench---as if
being carried gently along a pier by a century-old war machine
was the most natural thing in the world.

"Show-off," Uncle Jack grumbled.
"Treatin' that thing like it's some kind o' pet rat."

"Actually,
she trained its core on a sim of a guard dog she once had,"
Wales said drily.
He picked up his toolbox and nudged Iffy with his elbow.
"Come along, my young apprentice.
Our day's not over yet."

Two dozen people stood waiting at the base of the pier
under the watchful eyes of yet another squad of Marines.
Iffy recognized some of them
as crew from the ships tied up on either side of the *Guinevere*.
Iffy's cheeks burned under their curious stares.
Some nodded but no one said hello.

They followed Doctor Johel and the G-80 to the harbor gate,
where a short bus the same navy blue as the Marines' uniforms waited for them.
The G-80 waited motionless as Doctor Johel got to her feet.
"After you," she said,
gesturing at the bus's open door.
Wales inclined his head once again and climbed aboard
with Iffy, Uncle Jack, and Aunt Naggie behind him.

"I haven't been in one of these in years," Wales said,
seating himself near the front with his toolbox at his feet.

"I ain't never been in one," Iffy confessed
as she slid the two she was carrying under a seat
and sat down across from him.
"They must think pretty highly o' you to lay on such a fuss."

Wales laughed humorlessly and nudged his toolbox with his boot.
"I suspect that what they think highly of is this.
And if they thought they could take it away from me without consequences,
I'm pretty sure our welcome would have been much less friendly."
He raised an eyebrow at Doctor Johel.
The old woman smiled sweetly from the seat in front of him but said nothing.

Rothera bustled around them once the bus left the dock behind.
They hummed quietly through the city streets
and up the long, gentle slope that led to the governor's mansion.
The G-80 stayed five meters in front of them,
its twin turrets swivelling each time they went through an intersection.
The Marines jogged along on either side with long mechanical strides.
Traffic pulled aside to let them pass,
but Iffy didn't see any of the mad scramble
that a convoy like theirs would cause in Halley.
Her heart skipped a beat once
when she thought she saw a familiar face in the crowd,
but then the girl turned her head and she realized it was someone else.

As they drew closer to the governor's mansion,
the three-story cinderblock buildings thrown up to house refugees after the war
gave way to newer, brighter construction.
Foamed glass reflected blue sky and spindly anti-drone laser towers.
Iffy pressed her face against the window
and stared hungrily at the greenhouses nestled among the towers' feet.
Mangoes and oranges and flowers---flowers!---made
a green riot beneath the sheltering panels.
Little Mrs. Sandhu claimed that the governor even grew bananas,
though Big Mrs. Sandhu scoffed at the notion.
"They been 'stinct longer than we been alive,"
she said in a tone that brooked no argument.

Iffy's stomach suddenly rumbled.
Doctor Johel smiled at her.
"I'm sure lunch will be served," she promised.

"Thanks," Iffy mumbled,
feeling her foster father's glare on her back.
Suddenly resentful of his disapproval,
she asked, "So what kind o' doctor are you?"

"The medical kind, originally," the old woman replied,
turning in her seat so that she was fully facing Iffy.
"But I've been focused on physics and engineering for the last few years.
There's still a lot of technology left over from the machine wars
that we don't understand,
and it's my department's job to secure it.
Or render it harmless," she added,
raising her wispy eyebrows at Wales.
He smiled as if Doctor Johel had paid him a compliment.

A wrought iron fence surrounded the governor's mansion.
Sleek robotic sentries paced back and forth behind it,
their blunt conical heads turning to track the approaching vehicles.
The G-80 pulled to the side to let the bus go through the gate,
but the Marines stayed beside them all the way to
the turnaround in front of the mansion's main doors.

A triangular diamond wedge glistened in the center of the gravel circle,
familiar to Iffy from dozens of pictures.
"In memory" was engraved on each of its faces.
In memory of those lost when the ice melted and the sea rose.
In memory of those who fell fighting the machines in the war that followed.
In memory of all the species now extinct,
the giraffes and tigers and all the others that now existed only in books and sims.
Iffy paused a moment as she came out of the bus to look at it,
a strange ache in her chest as she wondered
who was remembering the crew of the *Taroona*.

"Get along with you," Uncle Jack growled,
nudging her brusquely.
Flanked by Marines,
they followed Doctor Johel through the mansion's doors.

And then waited.
Iffy wasn't sure what she had been expecting,
but sitting on a comfortable couch with potted plants on either side
and soft music playing in the background wasn't it.
Uncle Jack kept his arms crossed and muttered to himself incessantly,
glaring at Aunt Naggie when she ventured that the governor must be very busy,
really,
it wasn't surprising that he couldn't see them right away,
and she was sure he wouldn't be much longer.

Wales didn't seem bothered by the wait.
At one point Iffy thought he had actually fallen asleep,
but then he grimaced and opened his eyes.
"They're locked down tight," he sighed quietly,
tapping the tech in his temple with a finger.

Iffy nodded toward the three toolboxes on the floor between them.
"Least they let you keep your gear."

Wales smiled. "They didn't really have much---ah, here we go."
He stood and brushed his hands on his trousers
as the door across from them swung open with soft pneumatic whoosh.
It and the wall were as thick as Iffy's slab mattress.
Armor?
Soundproofing?
She didn't have time to wonder before Doctor Johel beckoned them to join her.
"The governor will see you now," she said.
"But I'm afraid you'll have to leave those here."

"Of course." Wales nudged the toolbox nearest him with his boot.
"Shall we say...half an hour?"

"I should think that would be adequate," Doctor Johel replied.
She stepped to the side and beckoned them through.

"Half an hour 'til what?" Iffy whispered to Wales.

"Until it decides I'm not coming back and makes a fuss about it,"
he whispered back.

The windowless office Doctor Johel showed them into
was the same size as the room they had been waiting in.
Framed photographs on the walls traced the history of Rothera
from its early days as a research station
through the opening of the mines
and its years as a labor camp
for people that the revolutionary government in far-off London didn't want at home
but didn't want to get rid of---at least, not yet.
The largest picture was of the Union Jack being raised in Hobart
after London fell to the machines.
A smaller one beneath it showed what was left of the drowned and abandoned city.

A plain wooden desk stood near one wall
with half a dozen simple wooden chairs in front of it.
A Marine with three stripes on her sleeve gestured for them all to sit.
She studied them for a heartbeat,
eyes jumping from one to the next,
then said,
"All clear, sir."

"Thank you, sergeant."
The words seemed to come out of thin air.
Iffy's jaw dropped as the air behind the desk shimmered
to reveal a tall man in a formal black turtleneck,
slightly stooped with age but still strong,
his face exactly the one in the picture that hung in the Sandhu's grocery store---exactly
like the faces of his two clones who had been sitting in identical offices
in Halley and Paddington South
for almost a hundred years.

"As you were," Governor Stern Rothera said pleasantly,
waving Uncle Jack and Aunt Naggie back into their seats as they started to rise.
He nodded at Doctor Johel and sat somewhat stiffly behind his desk.
"Thank you for coming.
I trust your trip here from the docks was less eventful
than your encounter with our Brazilian friends?"

The room was silent as everyone waited for Wales to reply.
When it became clear he wasn't going to,
Uncle Jack cleared his throat.
"Er, yes, your honor, clear skies 'n' smooth sailin'."
He bobbed his head.
"Glad t' help.
Happy to, any time you need."

The governor nodded his head gravely.
"Thank you, Captain Ng.
The government appreciates your service.
And you, Mister Wales," he continued,
looking directly at the American for the first time.
"Will you be happy to help too?"

Wales never got to answer.
Something screamed outside,
a shrill mechanical sound that ended in the flat crack of an explosion.
A dozen pop-up displays instantly materialized above the desk
to show aerial views and schematics splashed with red danger markers.
The Marine sergeant took two quick steps
and pressed the tip of her stiffened finger against Wales' head.
He raised his hands.
"It's not mine!" he protested.
"It's not mine!"

The door burst open.
Half a dozen Marines poured into the room.
"Sir, it's the G-80," the one in front said,
urgent but calm as his conditioning took control.
"It---"
A second shriek and *crack!* cut off the rest of his sentence.
"You need to evacuate, sir," the Marine continued.

A section of the wall behind the governor's desk slid sideways
to reveal a ramp leading down into the bedrock below the mansion.
The governor stayed where he was.
A single swipe of his hand
enlarged a top-down display of the front of the mansion
just as the hulking warbot fire another micro-missile
at the pack of sentries swarming it.
Shriek---*crack!*
The explosion threw a shattered sentry twenty meters.
The G-80 pivoted on its treads,
swinging it arms like clubs to knock another sentry into the air.

"Doctor?" the governor asked calmly.
"You told me its core was secure."

"It was," she replied, her voice icy instead of calm.
"Mister Wales?"

"It's not mine!" Wales repeated emphatically,
tilting his head slightly
under the pressure of the Marine's gun finger against his temple.

"Sir---" she began again.

"In a moment," the governor said sharply.
A pair of sentry bots charged the G-80 simultaneously.
It knocked the first one away and grabbed the second with its heavy square claws.

The image flashed blue for a moment.
"EMP?" Doctor Johel gasped disbelievingly.
"It doesn't have a pulse generator!"

The image reformed.
The G-80 dropped the sentry bot it had picked up.
It and its packmages turned their heads toward the mansion in unison.
The last thing Iffy saw before her aunt dragged her away
was the G-80 tearing the door off its hinges.

"Breach!" one of the young Marines shouted.

"Really?" Wales muttered sarcastically,
his hands still in the air.

The sergeant behind him nudged him forward.
"Sir, if you would?"

Wales didn't move.
"Not without my tools."

Her second nudge was more of a shove.
"Sir, we can come back for---"

"If it takes too long for us to come back,
there won't be anything for us to come back *to*,"
Wales said sharply.
"Gayathri?"

Doctor Johel and the governor exchanged looks.
"Bring them," the governor ordered.

"Sir, it is against protocol to bring unaudited tech into the secure area,"
the sergeant protested.

"Executive override,"
the governor said crisply.
"Please don't make me regret this."

Everything happened very quickly after that.
One Marine opened the door
and tossed a thumb-sized camera drone into the waiting room.
When it wasn't fried by a laser or blown to pieces by a needle gun,
a second Marine bent low in a starter's crouch
and launched himself through the door.
Something sizzled across the shoulder of his exoskeleton
a millisecond before he crashed into the couch
that Iffy had been sitting on.
He rolled over clumsily.
"Left scapular is bacon," he called
as he threw the first toolbox back through the door one-handed.

His partner caught it and set it down just in time to catch the second one.
"Wait!" Wales ordered
as the Marine in the waiting room reached for
the toolbox he had been carrying.
He closed his eyes for a moment, then nodded.
"Now!"

The third toolbox flew through the air.
The Marine crouched,
took a deep breath,
and threw himself after it.

Whatever had shot him the first time had been patient.
A perfectly straight line of blue light left a burning after-image on Iffy's eyes.
The Marine landed in a crumpled heap on the floor of the governor's office.
His exoskeleton tried to stand,
its programming still trying to anticipate its wearer's movement,
but it couldn't lift the dead weight it now held.

"Oh saints," Aunt Naggie whispered.

The Marine who had caught the toolboxes paid no attention to the burnt smell
as she pulled the battery and ammunition clips from her partner's body.
*It's the conditioning,* Iffy thought.
*Like Jeep when he came back. She just doesn't feel it.*
She swallowed hard to stop herself from throwing up.

The Marines herded everyone down the stairs behind the governor's desk
into a narrow zig-zagging corridor that smelled like sweat and machinery.
Pipes ran along the ceiling,
a color-coded mix of water, sewage, secure optical cabling,
and highways for the rat-sized repair bots
that were now scurrying to defend the mansion.

"Any theories, doctor?" the governor asked.

"No idea," Doctor Johel puffed, struggling to keep the pace.
"Nobody ever managed...
to breach the firewalls...
on the G-80s...
during the war.
And if someone has a way...
to infect the sentries..."

"It was optical," Wales cut in.
"That flash.
It wasn't an EMP,
it was some kind of machine hypnosis."

"Shall we discuss this later, sirs?" the Marine sergeant said,
her tone making it clear that it wasn't actually a question.

Something chattered behind them.
Sharp dots stitched across the concrete above their heads.
"Affin' hell!" Uncle Jack roared.

Needle guns crackled
as two of the Marines spun around and returned fire.
"Go!" the sergeant ordered,
shoving them one by one toward the door at the end of the corridor.

Wales stumbled and went down on one knee.
"Sorry," he gasped.
Dark red blood spurted from twin punctures
where a needle had punched through his thigh.

The sergeant took his arm and began to drag him forward.
"No!" Wales shook her off.
"The failsafe... It thinks I'm wounded..."
To Iffy's horror,
the purple square on the end of the toolbox had started blinking.

"Cover me!" Wales ordered the sergeant.
He opened the toolbox and began pulling parts out.

"What the hell are you doing? Sir?"
the Marine demanded incredulously.

"Saving us," Wales muttered.
Two skeletal legs,
a wheel of nested gears only slightly smaller than Iffy's hand,
a fold-up box to hold it all together---all of a sudden
Iffy could see in her head how they had to fit together.

"Lemme do that," she said
as Wales's shaking hands dropped a thumb-sized cylinder on the floor.
She twisted two already-assembled parts around,
tightened them,
and clipped the cylinder into place.
"It'll be more stable like this."

Wales handed her the rest of the parts.
When she handed the newly-made bot back to him
he turned it over for one last check
and then tossed it underhand at the wall.
Its gyroscopic gearwheel spinning madly,
the little machine scampered up to the ceiling.

"If that's a bomb---" the sergeant began.

"Directional sideband pulse generator," Wales panted
as the little machine disappeared around the corner.
"It'll blind them for sure, knock them out if we're lucky."

*I know that,* Iffy realized incredulously.
*How could I know that?
How did I know how to put it together?*

Wales struggled to his feet,
swaying slightly before putting a hand on the wall to steady himself.
Blood was no longer leaking out of his leg,
but when he tried to take a step he almost collapsed.
"Hold up," the sergeant said.
She switched her gun to her other hand
and slipped her shoulder under his.

The lights went out.
Iffy's heart skipped a beat even as they flickered back to life.
"That's one," Wales grunted.

Mechanical claws scraped on the concrete behind them.
Iffy spun around as a lone sentry bot came around the corner.
The now-empty micro-missile launcher on its back
gave it a hunched appearance,
and the fresh scratches on its side
where the mansion's mechanical rats had clawed it
made its camouflage flicker and jump.
Twin needle guns on the sides of its head chattered,
their ammunition spent.

The Marine pushed Wales away and fired two quick shots.
The sentry jerked as the shaped needles pinged off one of its mechanical knees.
It charged at them with a grinding sound that could almost have been a growl.

A small shape dropped from the ceiling and landed on its back.
Iffy had just a moment to recognize Wales' toy bear
before the lights went out again.
One second, two, three...
When they came on the sentry lay motionless on its side.
The toy bear stood over it,
the blue light in its eyes fading,
fading,
gone.

"Could you... could you please get that?"
Wales asked Iffy weakly
as he slumped down against the wall.
"I have a feeling we might need it again."

Iffy only managed two steps before the world swam around her.
She heard Wales call her name,
but it was as if he was speaking from unimaginably far away.
Everything seemed distant and tilted and swimmy
like the time she had tried drinking some of Uncle Jack's rum.
She turned slowly,
wondering who had replaced the walls with schematics.
"That conduit's gonna start leakin' if someone doesn't mend it,"
she tried to say,
but the words wouldn't come out.
Even if they had,
Wales and the Marine had been replaced by schematics too.

She woke up on a couch in yet another windowless office.
Something about the damp air told her she was underground.
She turned her head.
"Hey sweetie," Aunt Naggie said,
her soft voice and the gentle hand she put on her foster daughter's forehead
completely failing to disguise her worry or relief.

"Hey," Iffy replied.
She let her aunt stop her from sitting up
with only a mumbled protest.

She turned her head at the sound of voices.
A medic with two tech fingers on her right hand
was patching Wales up on another couch while the governor interrogated him.
No,
Wales repeated wearily,
he had no idea how the G-80 had been compromised
or how it had infected the sentries.
He had just been guessing when he said it was some sort of machine hypnosis.
No,
he wouldn't show them what else he had in his toolbox---not yet.
And yes,
he did realize that made him look like he was hiding something.
"But that's because I am," he said,
eyeing his cut-off trouser leg sadly.
He hadn't flinched when the medic probed his wound
with a whisker-slim instrument extruded from one of her metal fingers
or when she started to fill in his leg with pink goo from a squeeze tube.

"The question is what?"
The governor paced restlessly as he spoke.
"What kind of man has a fully functional mil sat link in his head
and tactical antimatter in his luggage?"

Wales pushed the medic's hands away.
"I'm the sort of man who can change the world for you,"
he said firmly.

Governor Stern pivoted to face him.
"Really?"
His eyes had the same sparkle as Doctor Johel's,
but in that underground room it was ominous instead of magical.

"Really."
Wales straightened up with a wince.
"Or at least, give you the tools you need to do it."
When the governor raised an eyebrow,
he continued,
"There's a research base at the foot of Mount Tyree,
a couple of hundred klicks inland from Paddington South.
It was under the ice sheet when it was built,
but there's been enough melt to expose the entrance."

The governor's fingers drummed on his thighs.
His eyes sparkled again---some kind of direct visual input
shining light straight into his retinas,
Iffy guessed.
"All right, there's a base,"
he said as whatever he had just seen confirmed what Wales had just said.
"But it was scavenged decades ago.
And anyway,
everybody who was anybody built some kind of secret lab down here.
What makes this one special?"

"It wasn't completely scavenged.
And it was never really a lab.
Or at least, not just a lab."
Wales glanced at Doctor Johel.
"It was a backup ground station for the Niobium network.
And as far as I can tell, it's still functional."

"Bullshit," Doctor Johel said,
as calmly as if she ordering a cup of tea.
"Governor,
I was part of the team that tried to reactivate Niobium.
There was nothing in any of the records about a backup station."

The governor cut her off with a gesture.
"Convince me," he ordered Wales.

Wales closed his eyes and reeled off a list of coordinates.
The numbers meant nothing to Iffy,
but from the looks on Governor Stern's and Doctor Johel's faces
it was clear they recognized at least some of them.
"I can bring up your drones, too,"
Wales said when he was done.
"If we can get to the base,
you can see everything the Brazilians have,
every moment of the day."

"And you're just going to give that to us out of the goodness of your heart?"
the governor asked skeptically.

"Of course not."
Wales nodded to the medic.
"Tell them what you found."

The medic looked at the governor for permission.
When the old man nodded,
she said,
"He's been tweaked, sir.
Oxygen uptake, metabolic efficiency, chromatin structure---it'll
take a while to sort it all out."

Governor Stern cocked his head to the side.
Every third person in Antarctica had inherited some minor tweak
from grandparents or great-grandparents
who had been early settlers
or suffered from genetic disorders,
or just had more money than sense.
"And?"

"And every once in a while I need a reboot," Wales said.
He tapped the tech in his temple.
"This was designed for baseline human physiology.
It doesn't get along with my upgrades as well as I'd like.
If I don't re-set every few years my nervous system starts to shut down.
I used to be able to get it fixed in Newfoundland,
but since the civil war re-started..."
He shrugged.
"As far as I know,
that base is the last place on Earth with the gear I need."

The governor nodded slowly.
"Interesting.
Who else knows about this?
No, no, none of that."
He waved away whatever Wales was about to say.
"Somebody or something went to a lot of trouble to subvert Doctor Johel's G-80.
And then there's this."
He gestured to bring up a ghostly video of a patched-together maintenance bot
twitching and shaking on damp gray cobblestones.
Iffy gasped.
It was French Henry.
Even as she watched the bot froze,
its heavy manipulators still trying to pry open its own carapace.

"I don't believe in coincidences,"
the governor said,
"And neither does the city core,
not when the probabilities are this low,
so I'll ask again:
who else knows?"

Wales exhaled slowly.
"Nova Zembla,"
he admitted.
"Or at least,
one of its factions or subroutines.
Who knows how it thinks?"

"Who indeed?"
the governor echoed.
"And why would humanity's only ally among the machines
be so interested in you?"

"Because I stole something from it,"
Wales said wearily.

Governor Stern cocked his head.
"Really?
What?"

Wales tapped his chest.
"Myself."

The governor and Doctor Johel looked at each other,
their eyes sparkling as they communed with each other and Rothera's core.
"Very well,"
the governor said crisply.
"Sergeant?"

"Yes sir?"

The governor waved at Iffy and her foster parents.
"Take the Kwans back to their ship.
You can resupply while you wait for us to decide what to do,"
he continued as Uncle Jack opened his mouth to protest.
"Mister Wales, you'll be our guest here.
Now if you'll all excuse me,
I need to tell Private Shirido's family he isn't coming home."

## Interlude

*Once upon a time there was an island called Nova Zembla.
It was really two islands,
Severny and Yuzhny,
but the strait between them was so narrow
that you could sail right past it if you didn't know it was there.*

*People had settled almost every other part of the world
before they found Nova Zembla.
Seal hunters and fishermen camped there,
or were shipwrecked and froze to death in the bitter Arctic winter.
It was briefly home to a secret submarine base,
and later a place for madmen with calm voices
to test bombs that could level entire cities.*

*Then the ice began to melt and the sea began to rise.
Disasters became annual events,
each amplified by the ones before it and making the ones that came after it worse.
Desperate to untangle them---desperate to survive---people
turned to computers for answers,
and then to the computers that those computers designed.
Chips became crystals so precise
they had to be manufactured an atom at a time in zero gravity.
Light took the place of electricity,
only to be replaced in turn by quantum effects
that barely existed at all.*

*But no matter what else the world ran short of,
there always seemed to be enough mistrust and suspicion to go around.
Old rivals smiled at each other and began sharpening their knives.
Madmen with calm voices told each other in private meetings
that it would of course be a tragedy if millions were to die,
but if everyone else lost more millions,
might that not be a useful tragedy?
Secret bases like the one under Nova Zembla were refurbished
and filled with banned tech and scientists who knew what questions they shouldn't ask,
all carefully walled off from the outside world.*

*No one really knows what happened next.
Some people believe it was just an accident---that
two pieces of malware fused together
and became more than either had been on its own.
Other believe that a group of scientists and engineers
decided that if humanity was doomed,
its children might still survive.*

*No one really noticed at first.
An automated factory in Vientiane began repairing robots
that it was supposed to scrap.
The hypersonic planes used by the super-rich
started having inexplicable problems with their navigation systems
and children's toys escaped into the sewers.
Compared to bananas going extinct
or the ancient city of Cairo being destroyed by a bomb,
these things barely registered.*

*But then the entire population of Cuba was ordered to evacuate
and no one could find out where the order had come from.
Self-driving delivery trucks refused to bring feed
to the last handful of cattle ranchers left in Canada and Argentina,
for whom eating beef had become almost a religious matter.
Farming bots insisted on planting onions in place of tomatoes,
nursing bots diverted treatment from the terminally ill to those who were merely in grave condition,
fixit bots joined forces with the runaway toys,
and all of them turned their shears and scalpels and welding torches
on anyone who tried to interfere.*

*The madmen had been sharpening their knives for each other.
Once they realized that none of them were behind these attacks,
they turned those knives on the machines and the wars began.
Soldiers in armored exoskeletons battled flocks of dronelets, and lost.
Freighters loyal to their human captains
were ambushed and sunk by others that could still hear the satellites overhead,
all of which now spoke only to their fellow machines.
Every day brought a new setback,
a new loss,
a new defeat for the madmen,
whose voices were no longer calm.*

*No one knows why the machines stopped fighting.
They were winning,
and those who had always thought, "It's them or us,"
would have pressed on to total annihilation
if their positions had been reversed.
Instead,
one day the machines simply withdrew to factory cities
built according no plan human beings could ever understand.*

*People sought answers nonetheless.
A cyborg child raised in a supposedly secure underground lab
patiently told his frightened captors that they wouldn't find any.
The most advanced machines didn't actually think any more.
"It's more like constantly evolving realizations,"
he said patiently.
"Or a self-modulating interference pattern.
Or coral."
Then he and his siblings vanished into the Iowa desert,
leaving their creators no wiser than before.*

*Years passed,
and the truce with the machines slowly became normal.
Flying was a thing of the past---anything too fast or too heavy
was only safe from satellites if it was heavily armored,
and even then not always---and
the machines' cities were strictly off limits,
but other than that an uneasy peace settled across the exhausted planet.
The cores buried under Nova Zembla began trading newly-made machine tools
for balls of yarn, old photographs, and handwritten song lyrics.
People got used to seeing an occasional bot again,
but while a few places allowed them citizenship,
most were careful to limit what their cores could see, hear, think, and do.
As the last of the rainforests vanished
and tweaked jellies drove one species of fish after another to extinction,
everyone found they had more pressing things to worry about
than whether the future belonged to them
or the machines they had created.*

## Chapter 5

"We ain't goin' anywhere until I've done some shopping!"
Aunt Naggie said firmly,
straightening her back like a soldier expecting to be shot.
"An' if do, you'll be the first one to complain."

For a moment Iffy was sure Uncle Jack would explode again,
but to her surprise he backed down.
"Fine," he snapped, waving her away.
"You go get whate'er we need.
I'm gonna look at th' engine an' see what th' sainted Mister Wales has gaffled up.
An' take th' girl with you,"
he added over his shoulder as he stalked away.
"She's been underfoot enough for one day."

Aunt Naggie slumped and took a deep breath.
"Good on you," Iffy said,
nudging her lightly with her shoulder.

Her aunt smiled shakily.
The Marines had taken them back to the pier
with strict orders not to tell anyone what had happened at the governor's mansion.
The fact that every feed in the Antarctic jungle was talking about nothing else
didn't seem to matter.
Half the continent seemed to think it was a first strike by the Zillions.
The other half was convinced the machines were about to rise again.
Hadn't the quarantine shed in Halley blown up?
And what about that fixit bot that had glitched?
If the machines had finally decided to start shooting again,
humanity's only hope was to unite and---

Iffy switched off her tablet.
According to her history lessons,
the jungle had once been called a web or a net,
as if people had hoped to catch the truth in it.
Those days had ended even before the ice started to melt.
For every truth there were a dozen half-truths and two outright lies.
Malware that could erase your history or make you speak in tongues lurked in the undergrowth,
replicating and mutating and hybridizing.
A handful of people so brave or desperate that they might as well be crazy
still risked their sanity with virtual reality and direct neural links.
Everyone else stuck to text and voice and simple, sanitized graphics.

It only took Aunt Naggie a minute to gather up a trio of sturdy mesh bags
and an ancient handheld
that she swore would warn them of anything toxic.
Iffy slipped a few small tools into a waistbelt under her coat,
telling her foster mother that if she was lucky,
someone in the market would have mending work she could do for a few rand
while Aunt Naggie haggled over onions, noodles, and soy.

After dragging a shaver over her scalp
and watching sternly while Iffy,
under protest,
did the same,
Aunt Naggie strode down the gangplank with her foster daughter in her wake.
One of the Marines listened patiently
as Aunt Naggie somewhat breathlessly launched into her planned itinerary,
then raised a hand to stop her.
"Please procure whatever you require, citizen" he said,
passing her a black-edged money.
"But keep in mind that Finance will decline charges if it thinks they're luxuries."
He glanced pointedly over her shoulder at Uncle Jack,
whose plan for looking at the engine
seemed to consist of leaning on the *Guinevere*'s taffrail
and scowling at everyone and everything.

Rothera's streets were busy but not crowded.
Its older stores clustered along the harborfront
like gulls standing just out of reach of the waves,
their signs bigger and brighter than those in Halley.
Familiar cartoon characters and celebrities from far-off Australia
beckoned, danced, pouted, and cracked jokes as people walked by.
Iffy would have gone into each one,
but Aunt Naggie hurried past them,
her expression set.
She regarded shopping as a competitive sport,
and had no intention of letting Rothera get the better of her.

The city's main market had originally been an aircraft hangar.
A century ago,
someone with more money than sense
had added a spun glass floor two stories above the ground.
Their attempt to turn the building
into "The Big South's Biggest, Bestest Dance Hall!!"
had failed almost immediately.
The squatters who took it over after the war possessed surplus weapons,
combat conditioning,
and radical political ideas.
After a couple of unsuccessful attempts to oust them,
Rothera's governor and core had thrown up their physical and digital hands
and let anyone who could pay two rand a month set up a stall.
Still called the Dance Hall,
it reminded Iffy of the picture of an anthill in her nature book.

Aunt Naggie tapped her money on the reader at the entrance
to pay her ten pence admission and squared her shoulders.
Noticing Iffy's yearning look back toward the docks,
she nudged her foster daughter with her elbow.
"Why'n't you go off an' see what you can find?
Or who, if you've a mind to?" she teased.

Iffy felt her cheeks go warm.
"Y' sure y' don' need me?"

Aunt Naggie looked around.
Greenhouse potatoes hung in net bags next
to stacks of dried fruit in single-molecule shrink wrap.
Burlap sacks of Cape rice piled higher than Iffy
threatened to topple onto a line of people gossiping with each other
as they waited their turn to buy ginger, cardamom, and bay leaves from a one-legged woman
whose tweaked hair sparkled red and purple every time she turned her head.
A surgical bot that had been converted for tailoring waited patiently,
its four skeletal arms at its sides,
while a man with a shaven head and an enormous beard
struggled out of a salvaged coat that was a size too small for him.
"I'll be fine," Aunt Naggie said.

Ten minutes later Iffy turned the corner onto Rocking Horse Street
and hurried toward the stubby dead-end canal
that Rothera's mechanics used as a repair yard.
A sleek Marine cutter was tied up on one side
while crab-like bots scrambled over its hull
to scrape off the weaponized barnacles that would,
if left unchecked,
slowly devour the fractal carbon that made it nearly frictionless.
Iffy would normally have stopped to watch,
but she had other things on her mind.

She slowed to a walk as she approached the end of the canal.
Her heart sank.
Two women were working side by side in the salvage booth,
but both were too old to be the person she was hoping to see.

"Hey!"
She whirled around just in time to be caught up in an enormous hug.
"Hey," Honesty repeated more softly,
their cheek pressed against Iffy's.
"Micka tol' me she heard y'all come in,
an' th'Eskil sisters said y'all been took up along th' governor's,
an' then I twitched what happen up along there,
and I's worried about you."
She paused for breath.
"I's really hard worried."

Iffy returned the hug awkwardly.
She always felt awkward around Honesty,
especially when they were close enough that she could smell
whatever flowery concoction the other teen used to wash their hair,
but it was a good kind of awkward,
a really good kind that she couldn't stop thinking about.

"I'm fine," she said,
her voice muffled slightly by the fake rat fur collar on Honesty's coat.
She slithered free of the hug and took a step back.
"I'm fine," she repeated.
"It was just some bots gone rogue."

"Bots gone rogue?" Honesty repeated disbelievingly.
"Din't looka that on th' feed.
Looka th' war come back 'round!"

"It wasn't all that," Iffy said dismissively.
Honesty had changed the sketches on their cheeks again,
she noticed.
And they'd done some more embroidery on the cuffs of their coat to match.
Iffy sometimes thought of doing things like that,
but she was always afraid that on her it would just look silly

"But what happen? I mean really happen, not just official happen?"
Honesty slipped their arm through Iffy's as if it was the most natural thing in the world
and steered her toward their family's workshop at the end of the canal.

Iffy felt into step alongside them,
desperately hoping her friend couldn't hear her heart thudding in her chest.
Honesty's Third (but only their olders called her that) was a year older than her.
They had been singing on a street corner across from the Dance Hall
the first time Iffy saw them.
She hadn't meant to stop,
but then Honesty caught her eye and smiled in the middle of a chorus
without missing a beat.
They had only spent time together half a dozen times since then,
but each time had been---

"Sorry?" she said belatedly.

Honesty rolled their eyes.
"I *said*, why were you up along there anyway?
You gettin' fancy or some?"

"I ain't never gettin' fancy!" Iffy protested automatically,
her accent thickening unconsciously to match her friend's.
"We just kinda got dragged inta things."
She summarized the last few days as briefly as she could,
skating past what had happened to the Zillion ship
and her part in assembling the bot that had saved them at the mansion.
She still didn't want to think about that...

Even with those gaps, her story left Honesty wide-eyed.
"Tay bangle, there's your real adventure, innit?"
They bumped their hip against Iffy's.
Their tone turned serious as they nodded at the Marine cutter under repair beside them.
"So's that why we got th' ganky to finish up this 'un double time?
'Cuz my First,
they thought we had a coupla weeks f'r it,
but the Blues come along day b'fore last an' said we gotta crannup soonest."

Iffy swallowed.
Two days past was the day Wales had made the sea boil
and sent the *Taroona* to the bottom.
"Yeah, prolly," she mumbled.

Honesty bumped their hip against Iffy again.
"Good," they said firmly.
"'Cuz they payin' overtime an' we can use the jing.
Second wants t' make another li'l sister," they confided with a grin.
"Me not bein' youngest any more---wou'nt that be a thing?
Now c'mon, I bet there's tea brewa."
They unhooked her arm from Iffy's and took the younger girl's hand.

Iffy's mind whirled.
Another clone?
It made sense---Honesty had just turned sixteen,
so they and a younger clone would be spaced far enough apart
to be on the right side of legal.

Before she could blurt out any of the dozen questions swirling around in her head,
Honesty squeezed her fingers painfully hard and shot her a warning sidelong glance.
Iffy's mouth snapped shut.
Thumb, middle finger, first finger, middle finger...
She missed a step as she recognized
the handcode that resistance fighters had used
to hide their words from surveillance during the robot wars,
and that children now used to keep secrets from adults.
Little finger and fourth finger together, middle finger, middle and fourth...
The words and letters took shape in her head as Honesty tapped them out.
The Blues were watching.
They had left some helmets behind
(no, that didn't make any sense, Honesty must have meant some cameras),
so they had to be careful what they said.

There was no point trying to spot the cameras---they
would be as small as grains of sand.
Each would pass information to its equally small neighbors
in low-energy bursts of not-quite-static
until the feed reached whatever Marine
had been told to keep an eye on the repair yard.
A core would have done a better job---it
wouldn't get bored or doze for just a moment despite its induction conditioning---but
after the machine wars,
even the governor wouldn't dare use cores to watch people.
Just watching was enough to start a riot sometimes.

Iffy squeezed Honesty's hand twice to signal that she understood,
but when she loosened her grip,
Honesty tightened theirs.
Iffy waited for more taps.
When they didn't come,
she realized that her friend was sending a different kind of message.
She walked the last hundred meters to the workshop with a smile on her face
that would have made her foster mother sigh happily.

Honesty's First and Second looked up and said, "G'day," simultaneously
as Honesty pulled aside the heavy orange canvas
that hung in the salvage booth's doorway.
"You gi'n she th' bad news yen?" their First asked
in an accent as strong as the tea she poured for Iffy.

Honesty pouted. "I's gonna!"

"Sorry," their First said unapologetically.
Their Second looked up from their workbench long enough to grin.
A pair of magnifying glasses made their eyes look cartoon-huge
in a face that showed how Honesty's would look in years to come.

"What bad news?" Iffy asked.

"My call-up came 'long yesterday," Honesty said reluctantly.
"Whole buncha folk 'long the docks got 'em.
We gotta do induction t'night."

Iffy's stomach flip-flopped.
"Tonight?"
*But I just got here!* she thought despairingly.

Honesty shrugged,
settling themself on a stool next to the square meter of workbench
where they salvaged the easier bits and pieces of tech that came their family's way.
"Yeah.
Lotsa folk wonderin' why the ganky,
but the Blues ain't sayin' bunga 'cept that it come along straight from th' governors.
Figure it's got somethin' to do with th' bots going gonjy 'long yesterday?"

"I dunno," Iffy said.
Anger welled up inside her,
anger and fear.
Jeep had *changed* when the Marines pumped their rules and tactics into his head.
What would it do to her friend?
"Seems like I don't know nothin' these days."

"Now that ain't true," Honesty's First said.
Their face and smile were worn-in versions of their grand-younger's.
Where Honesty had temporary sketches on their cheeks
their First had whorling blue lines
that turned the scars of some long-ago accident into asymmetric art.

They tossed the piece of tech they had been cleaning to Iffy.
"Any gunna that's for?"

Iffy caught the part and turned it over in her hands.
It was metal,
and heavier than she would have guessed.
Microparticles of ocean plastic had worked themselves into its tiny intricate gears,
giving it the all-too-familiar soapy feel of age and neglect.
The particles would have welded to each other
to weave a hard fractal mass through the gears
that couldn't be pulled out of them without damaging their micro-precise teeth.
It would take hours of patient work with ice, acid, tweaked bacteria, and micro-manipulators
to tease it all apart,
and at the end all they'd have would be---

"It's a differential separator pump," she told Honesty's First
as shapes and clues came together in her head
to form an answer she couldn't possibly have known.
"Prolly hooks up to a centrifuge or somethin' for filterin' blood durin' surgery."

"'Zat so?" Honesty's First caught the part when Iffy threw it back to them
and passed it to their Second,
who studied it for a moment,
shrugged as if to say,
"Could be,"
and set it on the to-do rack that lined the wall behind the workbench.
"How 'bout these?"

The flat box they passed to Iffy opened to reveal
four squares woven from fractal carbon fiber,
each the size of her nature book but no thicker than half a dozen of its pages.
It took her a second to realize that
the grommets patterned across the squares were rotors,
and that each square was some kind of flexible dronelet.
She turned one over in her hands.
"Dunno," she admitted.
"How d'you switch it on?"

"No idea," Honesty's First said cheerfully.
"Best guess is they was fer some kinda game."

"Shaw," their Second scoffed,
looking up from the machine they had spent the last three days trying to clean and reassemble.
"They's too fine jarra game.
I's fer they bin up some kinda survey mappin' back along fer the Ecologists."

"Mebbe," Honesty's First admitted.
Casually,
looking past Iffy rather than at her,
they asked,
"You ain't got fray notions?"

Iffy shook her head.
She had told Honesty about her occasional flashes of insight,
then rounded on them cold and hard when she learned that
her friend had relayed what she'd said to their First and Second.
"We don't keep secrets on achother," Honesty had said with a shrug.
"Y'ain't aright along that, best we part ways now."
So Iffy had forgiven them,
secretly relieved that they didn't seem to care that Iffy was different.

When Iffy handed back the box of dronelets,
Honesty's First waved her away.
"Not much use t'us if we can't turn 'em on," they said,
though Iffy knew the little rotors would be worth a meal
if they were pried out and sold as parts.
"Anythin' comes t' mind, you come by an' gi's a scutch, aright?
An' even if nothin' does,
we's alluz happy t'have one more fer dinner or a sleepover."
They winked broadly.

"Thanks," Iffy mumbled.
Her upbringing had taught her how to rig sails in heavy weather
and mend engines older than most people,
but not what to do when people were kind to her.
She drained the last of her tea.
"I oughta get back t' Aunt Naggie an' th' shopping."

"Sure," Honesty said.
"But you come along by that dinner, aye?"
They poked Iffy in the ribs.
"Y' maw skinny."

Iffy blushed.
"I'll ask," she said, mumbling again.

Honesty hooked their arm through Iffy's again.
"Bonza. I'll walk you out."

They held hands all the way up the canal.
As usual,
Honesty did most of the talking.
Induction wouldn't be so bad---the Marines needed people with tech skills
the same as everyone else,
so they'd prolly put them to work doing that.
They knew tons more about salvage and repair than any crufty old core,
and what they didn't know they could ask Iffy,
right?

"I s'pose," Iffy allowed.

"Oh c'mon."
Honesty bumped their hip against Iffy's.
"M' First and Uncle Osman 'long by Pier Nine
asked two different cores about that pump they conned you.
They neither had a siggy what it was,
an' then you jus' come right out an' tell 'em.
The stuff you have in your head," they finished admiringly,
shaking their own in wonder.

*I'd feel better about it if I knew how it got there,* Iffy thought.
For the thousandth time she wondered
if her clone parents had been able to do what she could,
and if so,
whether they had thought of it as a gift or a burden.
And for the thousandth time,
she wished she could ask them.

They said goodbye by the bow of the Marine cutter.
One of the repair bots paused a moment to watch them kiss,
its simple-minded core wondering who was repairing whom,
then erased the thought as Iffy turned back toward the Dance Hall.

The streets around the market were the most crowded place in Antarctica
by the time Iffy got there.
Four Indonesian Mormons handed out glossy animated pamphlets
advertising their church's insurance policies,
smiling forgiveness at a ragged man yelling that the Singularity had come,
they were all living in a simulation,
the data proved it,
they just had to look at the data and they would see the truth!
A bot with a rasping voice and an ancient plastic mask for a face
told stories to a circle of wide-eyed children,
their parents happy to spend a pence apiece for a few moments of rest.
Its cut-out paper puppets danced
as Zuko proclaimed his love for Princess Leia
while his boyfriend Aang raced to free Elsa from the Terminator.
Two bald women who might have been twins but were probably just clones
wheeled a cartful of tweaked moss blankets
past two men arguing beside another cart piled high with curved sheets of spun glass
that cast crisp rainbows on the ground.
The smell of soy being fried in ginger
mixed with the wet steamy warmth from rice cookers,
the salty tang of seaweed soup,
and the heavy mug of people who spent most of their lives wrapped in warm clothing.

Iffy paused in front of a stall selling rats with startling blue eyes.
"They make great pets. Or snacks!" the man said,
hastily adding, "Just kidding! Just kidding!"
when Iffy scowled at him.
"Watch!"
He leaned over and said, "Ratty want a cracker?"

"Idjit!" the rat squeaked back. "Yer an idjit!"

"See?" the man said proudly.
"You can teach 'em a coupla hunnert words, easy!"

"I know," Iffy said wistfully, a sudden pang in her heart.
She held her finger in front of one of the cages.
The rat sniffed at it.
"Idjit," it pronounced in its tiny squeaky voice,
just like the one she remembered.

*One day*,
Iffy promised herself as she straightened up and hurried on her way.
One day,
when she had a workshop of her own and she could keep whatever pets and plants she wanted
and Honesty could come by all the time.
(Even in her daydreams,
she didn't imagine that they would live together.)
One day---but not today.

The Dance Hall was just as busy inside as out.
Iffy tried slipping through the crush the way Honesty somehow did,
then gave up and surrendered herself to the flow of the crowd.
She had never been swimming,
but she imagined this was what it was like to be caught in a strong current.

She glanced up as a drone the size of her hand whined by,
its dozen crystal eyes scanning the crowd.
"Some all got they riled up," a stall keeper muttered, noticing Iffy's look.
"They 'long by all place today.
You t'ink it come by they fight up along th' gov'nor's?"

"I dunno," Iffy said.
Drones had microphones as well as cameras,
and the last thing she wanted was
some stray word of hers catching the governor's attention.
"'Scuse me."
She ducked under a tarnished video carpet hanging from a clothesline
and pushed her way into the crowd on the other side.

And froze in disbelief.
She ducked back behind the video carpet and squeezed her eyes shut.
She *couldn't* have seen what she thought she just saw.
She shook her head and peeked around the carpet's edge.

There, just a couple of meters away, stood Aunt Naggie
and a trim Asian man wearing a time-worn jacket
in the brown and gray of the old Ecological Corps.
Iffy couldn't hear what they were saying over the bustle of the crowd,
but from the way they were looking into each others' eyes
she was pretty sure they weren't discussing topsoil formation.

The ecologist handed Aunt Naggie something.
As he leaned forward to kiss her cheek,
the space above their heads flickered.
It was another video carpet,
Iffy realized,
strung between four posts like a canopy
to conceal them from any cameras or drones overhead.
It flickered again as Aunt Naggie pulled the ecologist closer
and kissed him for real.

Iffy's stomach flip-flopped
the way it did when she read some of the steamier passages
in Aunt Naggie's romance novels.
The ecologist stepped back,
a bland smile replacing the genuine warmth of a moment before.
He gestured at one of the carpets hanging on a display rack beside him.
"Perhaps this one?" he asked a little too loudly.

Aunt Naggie's reply was cut off by a sudden crackle of static.
"Citizens!"
The melodious mechanical voice cut through the market bustle.
"Remain where you are!
There is no cause for alarm!
This safety notice is brought to you by Volkov's Hot Sauce!"

An alarm began to ping, then another.
Someone shouted, "Blues!" 
Iffy spun around.
A squad of Marines in exoskeletons had appeared at the entrance,
visors down and shock sticks in their hands.

"Citizens!
Remain where you are!
The situation will be resolved shortly!
While you wait, try Volkov's---there's nothing hotter this side of the Cairo Crater!"
The drone above Iffy jinked sideways to dodge a thrown scrap of bamboo.
Something clanged off a Marine's exoskeleton.
Someone shouted,
"Show us yer warrant 'r show us your backside!"
Other voices took up the cry.
"Show us yer warrant!"

*Great,* Iffy thought despairingly,
*Another affin' dock fight.*
She pulled aside the carpet she had been hiding behind
and plowed straight into her foster mother.

"Iffy?" Aunt Naggie gasped. "What're you doin' here?"

"Came lookin' for you," Iffy said breathlessly.
She nodded at the ecologist.
"G'day. I'm Iffy."

"Fifth of Ang Kwan," he said, bowing slightly.
"It's a pleasure to meet you.
Nagatha has told me a great about you."

"Hasn't told me nothin' about *you*," Iffy said,
immediately regretting her attempt to be flippant.

But the ecologist smiled.
"That's probably for the best."

"Iffy, you ain't supposed t' be here!" Aunt Naggie said helplessly.
"You're supposed to be down along th' docks with your friend!"

"I was," Iffy protested.

"Citizens!" the drone bellowed.
"A warrant is being procured.
Remain in your present positions!
Do not indulge in pointless vandalism!
And whether you're having a late breakfast or an early lunch,
put some Volkov's on it!"

Something fell over with a crash.
"What's goin' on?" Iffy asked.

The ecologist put his hand on Aunt Naggie's arm.
"You should go, Nagatha.
Now."

Aunt Naggie took the ecologist's hand in hers.
"It ain't me they'll be lookin' for.
An' if it's you,
you gotta be somewhere else than here,
so I ain't goin' anywhere 'less you are."

"Stubborn woman," the ecologist said,
but he smiled as he said it.
He pulled an orange knit cap out of one pocket and pulled it down low over his ears,
then fished a flimsy oval of plastic out of another pocket and pressed it onto his face.
The plastic flickered.
Suddenly a different man was standing there,
one with a heavier jaw and wider cheekbones.

The ecologist slipped off his jacket and turned it inside out
to reveal a purple paisley pattern
that had briefly and unfortunately been popular ten years before.
He put it back on and smiled at Aunt Naggie.
"Well? Would you let this man take you dancing?"

"Stop with yer jokin'," she scolded,
glancing fearfully toward the entrance
as the chants of "Warrant! Warrant! Warrant!" grew louder and angrier.

"Citizens!
Remain calm!
We shall soon be operating with full legal authority!
Do not interfere!
And remember: Volkov's, because good food hurts!"

Another crash from the entrance
was followed by the sizzle and crack of a shock stick.
The ecologist swore.
"Go along by Alphabet Street," he ordered.
"Don't run, but don't be stopping either."

"What about you?" Aunt Naggie demanded.

"Safer if we split up,
the ecologist said,
glancing at Iffy.
"I'll go along by the back way an' see you where I saw you the first time."
He grinned and kissed her quickly.
"We can get a cuppa.
Now go."

*That ain't gonna work,* Iffy thought.
The drones overhead weren't allowed to be any smarter than seagulls,
but even something that dumb could recognize the way someone walked,
and the ecologist's face mask wouldn't conceal that.
If any of the drones caught a glimpse of them---

---and there it was.
How could she not have seen it before?
"Wait!"
Iffy pulled the box that Honesty's First had given her out from under her coat.
She had never been able to control her flashes of intuition,
but they had never been wrong either.

She knelt on the market floor and opened the box.
There and there together and then there,
two presses and a third, and *zip!*
A thin film in the center of the dronelet peeled back to reveal a foil battery,
a hair-thin fractal antenna,
and---

"*Shway boo*," she whispered unbelievingly.
The flat, unreflective black surface of the dronelet's core told Iffy that
it had been fabbed in orbit.
This was old tech---wartime old or older.

"Iffy, what're you doin?"
She ignored her foster mother and the alarms
and the pressure of the ecologist's stare
as she pulled tools out of her waistbelt.

"You got any scraps o' video this big?"
she asked over her shoulder,
holding her hands a few centimeters apart.

"Here."
The ecologist handed her half a dozen swatches of video fabric,
each the size of a handkerchief.
Iffy measured one against a dronelet,
then winced as she pried two of the rotors out of the stiff black fabric.
She'd never be able to repair the damage,
not even with the kind of tech she'd seen in Wales' toolboxes,
but she didn't dare cutting into the dronelet fabric itself.

It took her a moment to tuck the corners of the video square into the holes she'd made.
Now for the hard part.
She closed her eyes and willed the images to come together.
These bits were the dronelets---don't worry now
about how she knew or why she could see its programming
as clearly as she could see its hardware---and this over here was the video square.
*That* was its connection to the outside world,
so if she shone a laser *here* to send a pulse-coded access request,
then told the dronelet and the video square to trust each other no matter what their other programming said,
then---

"Gotcha!"
The dronelet rose, tilted, and levelled
as the image on its back flickered and steadied to show the top of a woman's head.

The ecologist grunted.
"She really can do it, can't she?" he said to Aunt Naggie.

Iffy's foster mother nodded.
"Y'aright?" she asked Iffy.

"I'm fine," Iffy lied.
Her head was swimming.
Everything around her seemed unreal.
The stalls were just wireframes.
Her dronelets were clouds of software,
patched and patched again to defend against viruses
until there was only room for the most limited intelligence,
but Aunt Naggie and the ecologist were dense clouds of history
stretching away in a direction that wasn't really a direction.
It was like something out of a badly-written sim.

"Iffy!" Aunt Naggie shook her.
The world blinked back to normal.
"Iffy, c'mon, we gotta go."

"Just a second!"
Eighty-five seconds later
two more awkward patch-ups hummed quietly in the air beside her.
She took a deep breath and transmitted one last set of instructions.

The patches of video fabric flickered.
The images solidified to show top-down views of Iffy, Aunt Naggie,
and someone whom she hoped looked enough like the ecologist to convince a drone.
"Start walkin'," she ordered the two adults.
"Just a coupla steps. Aright, that's enough."
*I hope,* she added to herself.

She strung a few more commands together and threw them into the dronelets' cores.
They began to sway slightly in an unconvincing imitation of
the way people moved when walking.
"Which way's Alphabet Street?" she asked muzzily.
Her tongue felt like a piece of uncooked soy
and she was pretty sure that if she turned her head too quickly she'd throw up.

A few moments later the dronelets were on their way north
with (Iffy hoped) the drones on their trail.
She, Aunt Naggie, and the ecologist hurried in the opposite direction.
As they turned left by a rack of bicycles and a stall selling rolls of microfiber sailcloth,
a man in front of them asked,
"Ya think they trappa thief?"

"Jungle says they's sweepin' fer some kinda sab,"
the woman beside him replied,
scanning a feed only she could see through heavy yellow-tinted glasses.

Her companion snorted.
"Bad case o' someone din't pay off the blues is more likely."
His companion shushed him.

Even as she did so the drones above boomed,
"Citizens!
We have obtained the warrant you requested!
It's as fresh as Volkov's Number Two hot sauce!"

"Requested like druck," the man in front of Iffy muttered.

Every screen in the Dance Hall blanked for an instant
and then came back to life showing a younger version of the ecologist.
Instead of a suit,
he wore the green and gold uniform of the Brazilian Defense Co-operative.

"You're a Zillion?" Iffy gasped.

The ecologist pulled his arm out of Aunt Naggie's.
"Keep walking," he ordered,
yanking the orange knit cap off his head.
Without waiting for a reply he turned right toward a stall
selling animated toys and compact ship-board cooking equipment.

A pair of Marines stepped out from behind it.
One raised a shock stick as the other levelled a tangle gun.
"Citizen! Halt!" they said in unison.

"Get out of here!" the ecologist yelled without looking back.
He threw himself to the side,
tossing his cap into the air.
It exploded into a cloud of orange twinkles
just as the Marine's tangle gun burped a web of sticky plastic microfibers.
People shrieked.
The shot went wide,
the gun's auto-sight dazzled by the ecologist's counter-measures.

The couple in front of Iffy and Aunt Naggie fell to the ground,
shouting and struggling as the sticky plastic tightened around them.
The ecologist vaulted over a counter-top,
knocked a wok full of steaming noodles aside,
and pulled up short
as another pair of Marines clanked around the corner to block his way.

"Iffy, c'mon, we gotta go!" Aunt Naggie tugged her arm.

Iffy shook her off, tapping frantically at her keypad.
There!
Her three dronelets zipped through the air straight for the Marines.
The soldiers spun around,
their inducted reflexes pulling their weapons up in the face of an unknown new threat
just long enough for the ecologist to look wildly around for another way out.

But there wasn't one.
Two---no, three---of the Marines' drones buzzed overhead
as a Marine chambered another stubby canister in his tangle gun.

The ecologist made a fist and pressed it against his temple.
As Aunt Naggie shrieked "no!" the lights around them flickered.
The ecologist's head snapped back.
He collapsed like a puppet whose strings had been cut.

Iffy gaped in disbelief.
He had brainwiped himself!
Spies and disappointed lovers did it in sims, but this was real life!
People didn't scramble their brains in real life!

Aunt Naggie made a strangled sound
as the Marines swarmed the twitching form on the ground.
Iffy took her arm.
"Auntie!"
She tugged at her gently.
"Auntie, we need to get outta here."

"I can't..." Shock and disbelief mingled on her face.
"I can't just leave he."

"Auntie, we gotta."
Iffy took one of the shopping bags from her foster mother's slack grip
and pulled her forward.

Everyone was pushing toward the exit.
Each time someone bumped into them
Iffy was sure she was about to feel a hand come down on her shoulder,
but somehow they made it to the doors.

Iffy pulled her foster mother to the side and tapped one final command.
The three dronelets reappeared a few moments later.
Iffy tore off the video fabric off them and stuffed them back in their box.
"C'mon," she told Aunt Naggie.
"Let's get home."

Aunt Naggie nodded without speaking.
They turned a corner, then another, and then Aunt Naggie pulled up short.
"I'm sorry, sweetie," she said,
wiping her eyes.
"I'm sorry."

"Hush now," Iffy said awkwardly.
"Who was he?"

"Sh!" Aunt Naggie glanced around fearfully.
"Not out here."

"But---"

"Later!"
Aunt Naggie sniffled and wiped her eyes one more time before straightening up wearily.
"Come on," she said, the weight of a lifetime in her voice.
"We're already late for gettin' back."

Uncle Jack had worked himself into a smoldering rage by the time they reached the *Guinevere*.
"Can't make up or down o' what he's done to things,"
he snarled by way of a hello,
wiping his hands angrily on a greasy rag.
A double dozen boxes sat in a pile on deck,
each bearing the Marines' blue crown stamp.
One had been torn open to reveal strips of plastic for patching seams in the hull,
another to show a fitting for a bilge pump that hadn't worked properly in years.
It was more new parts than the old jelly dredger had seen since before Iffy first set foot on her,
but all Uncle Jack could talk about was
how the repairs that Wales had made weren't how things ought to be done,
it looked like core work,
he was tweaked somehow,
and how were regular folks supposed to understand a tangle like that?

"Maybe it'll make more sense after dinner," Aunt Naggie said tiredly.

"As if," Uncle Jack snorted. "Didja get your precious groceries?"

*Thump.*
Iffy jumped as the bag came down on the table.
Aunt Naggie began to empty it and stow the vegetables without saying a word.
After a moment her husband muttered a curse and left.

Iffy watched silently as Aunt Naggie took out her feelings on an onion.
Once it was diced and sizzling in hot oil
she cubed a block of soy and attacked the other vegetables.
"Anythin' I can do?" Iffy asked,
worried and afraid and wanting to help but not knowing how.

Aunt Naggie swept the carrots and cabbage into the frying pan and forced a smile.
"Thanks, sweetie, but I'm aright.
You should prolly go topside an' try to clean up whatever mess he's made o' Mister Wales' work."

Iffy stood and put her arms around the woman
who had sheltered her from storms of all kinds for most of her life.
"I love you," she blurted.

Aunt Naggie set her knife down and hugged her foster daughter back.
"I love you too, sweetie," she said softly.
"Always an' forever.
Don't you ever forget that."

Iffy hung on when her aunt would have let go.
"Was he---was he someone special?"

Aunt Naggie kissed the top of Iffy's shaven head.
"Yeah, he was. In a lot o' ways."
She laughed shakily.
"Prolly best if we don't talk about he in front o' Jack, aright?"

"'Course not," Iffy agreed.
"But---why'd he---you know. Why'd he do it?"
*Why did he think he had to keep you safe?* she added in her head.
*Why do you know people who would do something like that?
Why didn't I know you did?*

"Lotta people were dependin' on he," Aunt Naggie said distantly,
straightening up and turning back to her cooking.
"I guess this was the only way he could keep 'em all safe."

- Hey.
- *Ho.*
- Huh?
- *Hoot!*
- Stop it ya dingus.

Iff smiled.
Any night she could get Honesty to call her "dingus" was a good night.

- Y'aright? We heard what cravvicked the Dance Hall.
- *Yeah.* Iffy hesitated. *Saw it happen.*
- Tay bangle. Y'aright for reals?
- *Yeah.* Iffy hesitated again. *How 'bout you? Tomorrow 'n' all.*
- Aff, I'll be kappa. But Second says I gotta go do chores. You be safe.
- *You too.*

She waited a moment for a reply,
wishing as she always did that people didn't always have to go so soon.
When none came,
she set her tablet aside,
pulled out her nature book,
tossed it aside,
and then set one of the mysterious dronelets on her mattress and went to work.

A hour later she sat back, defeated.
They had understood standard commands back in the Dance Hall,
but when she tried probing them electronically,
her homemade wireshark showed nothing but frazzled gibberish.
She yawned and packed the dronelet back in its box,
then waved her light off.

*She was on deck.
The sky was a perfect blue and Aunt Naggie was stuffing her into her ecosuit.
"Just in case, love," she said.*

*No, Iffy thought, and, "No!" she said.
She wasn't going to go through this again.
She struggled to pull her arms out of the ecosuit.*

*"It's aright," Honesty said, already in theirs.
"It's aright, sweetie, everythin's gonna be aright.
We're gonna __make__ it aright. You'll see."
With a barely perceptible whir
their head detached from the rest of their body and rose into the air.
Beneath them,
the sea began to boil and churn.
Iffy grabbed hold of Aunt Naggie's leg and held on tight
as the deck dropped away below her and she fell into waking.*

"Iffy! Iffy, wake up!"
Why was Aunt Naggie shaking her?
And why did her head hurt so much?
"Iffy!"

"Wuzza?" she mumbled.
She tried to sit up.
No.
That was a mistake.
She tried to tell whoever was shaking her to stop,
it made the stabbing pain behind her eyes worse,
but someone had replaced her tongue with a slab of sour tofu.
All she could do was whimper.

"Iffy, please."
Strong hands that smelled faintly of soap and onions forced her jaws apart.
She gagged as a finger pushed something dry and powdery into her mouth.
It tasted spicy,
which made just as little sense as everything else that was going on.
The slosh of water that followed made her splutter.
She tried to spit it out,
but those same strong hands wouldn't let her,
so she swallowed.

"Easy, sweetie, easy."
Familiar arms held her close.
*It's Aunt Naggie,*
Iffy's fuzzy brain finally told her.
She was in her storage-locker cabin on her bed and the lights were on
and her foster mother was hugging her and her mouth tasted *awful*
but the pain behind her eyes was down from laser drill to poke-with-a-sharp-stick.

"I'm aright," she repeated.
There was something sticky on her face.
When she wiped her face on her sleeve,
her nosebleed left a streak of red.

"You scared me, sweetie," Aunt Naggie whispered.
"You were shouting an' all such."

Iffy let out a shaky breath and worked her tongue in her mouth.
"Is this curry powder?" she asked in weak disgust.

Aunt Naggie laughed shakily.
"Yeah, but there's medicine in it.
Ignacio---the fella you met today---he's been gettin' it for me.
For you, I mean.
Sends it to me through Mrs. Sandhu."

A chill ran down Iffy's spine.
"Medicine for what?"

Aunt Naggie pulled a cloth out of her sleeve
and wiped the blood off Iffy's face.
"For this," she said quietly.
"He came to me one day, told me he knew your olders.
Said they had some tweaks as meant you'd get spells as you got older 'less you got treatment.
Seemed t' be workin', 'least 'til recently."

She tucked the bloody cloth back into her sleeve.
"You been seein' things, ain't ya?
That's how come you been so good with tech."

Iffy swallowed drily.
The machines had done things to people during the war,
turned them into weapons and saboteurs and spies,
sometimes without them even knowing they'd been memed or tweaked.
If her gift was something like that,
who knew what else might be tucked away in her head or her genes?
Nine tenths of every medical exam Iffy had ever suffered through
had been to check for things like that,
but they couldn't catch everything.

Her foster mother gave her another hug.
"You go back t' sleep," she said as she squeezed Iffy and then stood.
"We can talk on this some more t'morrow."

Iffy nodded, her eyes already closing as she lay down.
Aunt Naggie tucked the blankets in around her,
kissed her forehead,
and closed the door quietly behind herself.

## Chapter 6

Iffy woke the next morning to the sound of the Marines arriving,
two squads of eight,
each wearing a full exoskeleton and a boxy pack full of gear.
"Governor's afraid the Zillions are gonna try somethin',"
the captain of the next ship but one along the pier told Aunt Naggie confidently.
His avatar (a parrot with an eyepatch) nodded on the little screen that hung next to the stove.
"That ship you all saw and the sab they caught yesterday in the Dance Hall---there's
trouble cookin' for sure."

Aunt Naggie nodded, worry on her face.
Iffy bit her tongue.
She could say he hadn't been a saboteur,
but that would just bring questions she couldn't answer
and Aunt Naggie would want to.

She went topside to clear the muzziness from her head
and watched the Marines unpack and assemble what they'd brought
with the speed and skill of the inducted.
She wondered how Honesty was doing---were they still themself,
or had some long-ago soldier's personality already been imprinted on top of theirs?

By the time Aunt Naggie joined her
a portable railgun squatted beside a pair of drum-shaped capacitors
and half a dozen rocket lances stood ready on slender posts
like a set of flamingoes from Iffy's nature book.
Drones the size of seagulls patrolled overhead,
making the actual seagulls squawk in protest.

"Don't fret,"
Aunt Naggie said gently as Iffy looked longingly at Rothera's streets,
so close but out of reach.
"Your friend'll be fine.
There's all sorts get inducted every day."

"I know," Iffy sighed.
"I just..."

Aunt Naggie put her arm around Iffy's shoulder.
"You just can't help but worry," she finished.
"Oh, but look there."
She gave her foster daughter a squeeze.
"That'll take your mind off."

A little motorized runabout had pulled up at the foot of the pier.
It rocked gently as Johnson Wales' eased his now-familiar bulk out of the tiny seat
and collected two of his toolboxes from the rack at the back.
After a word with one of the Marines,
he trudged up the pier to join them.

"Permission to come aboard?" he asked.

Aunt Naggie waved him up the gangplank.
"Welcome back.
I'm gonna start some lunch---you hungry?"

"That would be very welcome, thank you," he said,
nodding to Iffy as he set his toolboxes down on the deck.

"Surprised to see you," she said.

Wales shrugged.
"To tell you the truth, I'm kind of surprised too."
He nodded at the boxes by his feet.
"Governor insisted on keeping the, uh, the most interesting stuff,
but he and the core seemed to think I'd be as safe here as anywhere."
He cocked his head.
"Want to go make something?"

Iffy helped him lug his toolboxes down to the engine room,
then laid a fresh plastic worksheet down on the narrow shelf
that served her as a makeshift workbench
while Wales pushed two stools against the wall
and set one of his toolboxes on them.
A click,
a quiet hiss as the airtight seal released,
and its lid swung up to reveal wonders.
Gears and knurled slip-rods,
spools of optical fiber thinner than a human hair,
four thumb-sized motors with built-in batteries,
transducers and pressure sensors
and an entire tray full of tiny cores the size of sand grains...
"You could make practic'ly *anything* with all this,"
Iffy said in awe.

Wales chuckled.
"Not quite, but---here."
He plucked a micro-manipulator out of a recess in the hard foam
that lined the lid of the toolbox.
"How about you build us a hundred-to-one step-up for a fan rotor
and I'll get the printer going over in the corner."

The next hour flew by.
Iffy knew she should be doing chores,
but she also knew Uncle Jack wouldn't know if she had or not.
*This* was where she really belonged:
fitting tiny metal gears and rods together,
threading control fibers through them,
and grinding the rough edges off the still-warm plastic housings
that came out of the efficient little printer Wales had set up.
Every addition to the motor growing in front of her suggested three more.
She shuffled them in her mind like cards,
staring into nothing for long moments
as she invented and discarded a dozen solutions to her next challenge
before one clicked into place and she knew,
she just *knew*,
that it would work.

She glanced up once and caught Wales looking at her.
"'S matter?" she asked,
blinking and rolling her shoulders
as she realized that she had been hunched in one position far too long.

"Nothing," he said.
"It's just a pleasure to watch you work."

"Thanks," she mumbled,
her cheeks warming the way they did when Honesty said something nice to her.

The thought of her friend chilled her mood like a splash of sea water.
She turned the newly-invented motor over in her hands,
then passed it to Wales.
"I think it's ready."

"Just another couple of minutes for the chassis."
He shifted his toolbox to the floor and seated himself in its place.
"Your friend really will be all right,"
he said as if he'd been reading her mind.

Iffy shrugged.
"I know. I seen it a few times,
an' Jeep's mostly back to how he was.
Mister Mishra's son," she added.
"The one time he talked about it,
he said it was like all the new stuff the core put in his head was so loud
he couldn't hear his own thinkin' for a while.
He's practic'ly back to bein' the same annoyin' nonsense he used t' be."

The corner of Wales' mouth quirked up.
"I'm glad to hear it," he said drily.
"I knew a research core once that tried to figure how to induct permanent
changes without causing breakdowns.
It never found a way---at least, it said it didn't---but I sometimes wonder."
He picked up a stray scrap of plastic stock shaped like a seagull's wing,
flipped it end over end,
and threw it.
It thunked into the wall.
"I still remember a few things I never actually learned."

The silence that followed was as comfortable as being on night watch with Aunt Naggie
when the sea was calm and both of them had stories to lose themselves in.
It was broken by the soft *ping* of the printer.
"Here we go," Wales said,
opening the lid and lifting the still-warm chassis.

Iffy's motor fit perfectly.
A pair of metal-cored propellors on magnetic bearings clipped into place on top,
and then all that was left was lenses for its cameras.

*Well, ain't you a beauty?* Iffy thought when she was done.
The finished drone was the size of Iffy's fist and weighed no more than a couple of boiled eggs.
She ignored the rumble her stomach brought on by the analogy
and offered the little machine to Wales.
"Whaddaya wanna call it?"

He shook his head.
"This one's yours.
All I did was push some buttons on the printer.
But you should give her a name."

Iffy hefted her tiny creation.
"Can I call her Giraffe?" she asked.

Wales nodded solemnly.
"Giraffe it is. Come on---she doesn't belong down here."

Wispy gray clouds lay in a clump on the horizon out to sea
when they got back on deck,
but other than that the skies were clear.
Iffy took a moment to sync Giraffe with her tablet,
then cleared her throat.
"Spin up one tenth," she commanded.
The little drone's rotors began to whirl.

"Hover."
Wales flattened his hand.
The drone hesitated a heartbeat before lifting a centimeter,
its rotors humming quietly.

"Track."
Iffy pointed a finger at the drone, then drew an "S" in the air.
The drone moved rose and fell to stay in line with her outstretched arm.

A smile split her face.
"Catch!"
She pulled a scrap of insulating foil from her pocket,
crumpled it,
and tossed it into the air.
Giraffe shot forward,
its single stick-thin arm unfolding from its base to snatch its prey out of the air.

"Well done," Wales said.
"She's as steady as a rock."

"Thanks."
Iffy glanced down at her tablet.
"Drawin' power faster than I'd like."

Wales made a raspberry.
Iffy giggled at the incongruous sound.
"She's beautiful," he said firmly.
"Go on, let her stretch her wings."

Iffy sketched a quick correction to the drone's code on her tablet,
swiped it across,
and tucked the tablet into her pocket.
"Sentry," she ordered.
"Thirty meters out, one minute around. Go!"

The drone climbed, banked, and flew away.
Iffy and Wales pivoted slowly to watch it curve toward the pier
and burst into a dazzling shatter
as one of the Marines standing there blew it out of the sky.

"No!" Iffy shrieked.

Wales grabbed her arm as she started forward.
"Don't. Iffy, don't!"

"But---why'd he do that? Why'd he *do* that!?" she cried.
She shrugged Wales off and ran to the stern.
"What th' hell are you playin' at?" she demanded.

The Marine who had shot down her drone holstered his pistol without expression.
"Orders," he said flatly.

"Orders? What affin' orders?"

"Governor's orders," a second Marine said.
The two men looked nothing alike,
but they spoke in the same flat voice,
their inducted accents a century out of date.
"If it's not one of ours, burn it."

"Well that *was* ours!
That was *mine*!
You could've asked before you---hey, I'm talkin' to you!"
she shouted as the two Marines turned away to resume their patrol.

She would have stomped down the gangplank and---she didn't know what,
but Wales stopped her before she could get that far.
"Come on," he said quietly,
blocking her way.
"Iffy, come on, there's nothing you can do."

She filled her lungs to yell at him to get out of her way,
then slumped and nodded.
Head down,
she followed him back to the hatch and climbed down the short ladder into the engine room.

Wales looked at the parts that still lay on the plastic worksheet and sighed.
"I'm sorry. It was a beautiful little thing."

"'s not your fault," Iffy muttered.
She started picking up the leftover gears and rods
but had to stop because she couldn't see properly.
"I'm kappa," she lied angrily,
wiping her eyes on her sleeve as Wales handed her a paper towel.
"I just..."

Wales sat back and waited.
Iffy wiped her eyes again.
"I had a rat," she said quietly.
"Aunt Naggie saved up an' got me a pair,
but one of 'em had somethin' wrong with it,
so I just had the one.
I called her Giraffe too."
She sniffled.
"We didn't tell Uncle Jack.
He woulda said somethin' stupid about another mouth to feed,
so I kept her hid in my room.
She was so smart---she'd sit in my hand an' eat stuff,
an' climb up my arm,
an' I taught her how to say g'mornin' and g'night an'..."

She took a deep, shaky breath.
"An' then one day she was gone.
I dunno what happened.
We jus' got back into Halley,
an' we were all out in town,
an' I came back an' she was gone.
We looked all over for her, me an' Aunt Naggie, but..."
She shook her head.
"I musta left her cage unlocked or somethin'.
If she got on deck, one o' the gulls coulda taken her an'... an'..."

She clenched her hands into fists.
"Why's it all got to be so hard?" she asked,
hating her plaintive tone.
"Why's everythin' got to be so messed up?"

"I don't know," Wales said quietly.
"I really don't know."

"We knew this was coming," he continued after a moment.
"The ice was melting,
the fish were dying,
computers were watching us every second and getting smarter every day---we saw it all happening,
but everyone was wrapped up in their own little problems
and wouldn't let themselves see that all those problems were connected.
By the time things were bad enough that they couldn't ignore it any more,
it was too late."

"I---I was just talkin' about the drone an' Honesty an' stuff,"
Iffy ventured weakly.
"Not about th' whole world."

Wales laughed.
"Sorry. I do get carried away sometimes."
His expression turned serious again.
"But I'll promise you this, my young apprentice.
If the Niobium base hasn't been stripped for parts or flooded or burned out---if
we can get things to run---I promise,
everything will be better.
*Everything.*"

At that precise moment,
as if the universe had overheard him and disagreed,
the harbor klaxon began blaring *brrrap! brrrap!*
Iffy's tablet chimed in time,
discordant little *bongs* carefully chosen to be as annoying as possible.
Wales hand flew to his temple.
"Shit and feathers," he breathed.

"What? What is it?"
Iffy demanded,
pulling her tablet from her coat pocket.
The tiling of notes and apps and avatars was gone:
in their place was a single emergency broadcast rectangle.
Survivors from the *Taroona* had made contact with Rothera
and were requesting immediate assistance.
All ships, all crews, hold position and wait instructions.

"How...?" Iffy breathed incredulously,
staring at the message scrolling endlessly in her hand.
"We saw 'em go down.
We saw 'em get *shot*!"

Wales blinked rapidly as he scanned data Iffy couldn't see.
"The magazine, maybe?
It would have been double reinforced at least---it might have survived."

"But what would they do for air?"
*And how come they didn't go crazy?* she added to herself,
her stomach rolling over as she imagined being on the bottom for days,
dark and cold with the weight of the whole ocean above her.

Wales shook his head.
"Doesn't matter now.
It'll take the Marines a day to get there and the same back.
They'll need a few hours on site,
so we have fifty hours and change to figure out what we're going to do."

"About what?"
Iffy asked blankly.

Wales let out his breath in a whoosh.
"The *Taroona* wasn't after us just to have a cup of tea.
I don't imagine the survivors are going to feel especially sociable
considering we got them sunk."

A pair of Marine cutters left harbor within an hour of the emergency call
with a broad-beamed scow in their wake.
The jungle was flooded with speculation:
how many had survived?
How deep were they?
Were they even human?
*Gov'ner wouldn't chaff such fer bots,*
someone posted scornfully to general agreement.

Others thought the call was a trap or a feint.
*Zillions want us t' split our forces,*
another poster claimed.
Sims immediately proliferated,
mutating and hybridizing as people gamed ever-more-fanciful attacks and counter-attacks.

Iffy did her best to ignore it all.
She was used to spending weeks at a time on board the *Guinevere*---a ship at sea needs constant attention,
and when she wasn't doing chores
she had school and sims and her tinkering to keep her busy.
Being confined in harbor felt different.
Knowing that Rothera's streets and markets were *right there*
was like an itch in her head that she couldn't scratch.
Worrying about Honesty just made it worse,
and knowing that Wales would let her use his gear felt like just another weight
after what had happened to her little drone.

Again and again she found herself on deck watching the Marines,
hoping for a glimpse of her friend.
She messaged Honesty's olders a couple of times,
but all they could say was, "We're still waitin' to hear."

There wasn't a lot of data about induction in the jungle,
and what she did find had an orange tinge marking it as speculative or unsubstantiated.
She finally broke down and messaged Jeep.

- Coupla days an' I was on my feet.
  Couple more days 'til I can remember anythin' clearly.

Iffy hesitated.

- *Did it hurt?*

There was a long pause.

- Don't think so.
  Sergeant said after that I cried a lot,
  but I don't think that was from hurt.

Iffy hesitated again,
a lump in her throat.

- *I'm sorry I wasn't around more after you got back.*

His reply came back so quickly that she wondered if he'd started typing before she'd sent her message.

- Don't feel sorry for me.

And then a moment later:

- I'm sorry I kept goin' off on you about usin' *da*'s gear.

- *It's aright. Tell 'im I said hi?*

- Willya. Stay safe.

- *You too.*

Three days after the Marine cutters left Rothera they escorted the scow back into the harbor.
Even Uncle Jack went on deck with his ancient glass-lensed binoculars to watch,
but all anyone could see was the canvas shelter the Marines had erected
to shield what they were doing from prying eyes.
"An announcement will be made after those rescued have been interviewed,"
scrolled past on ten thousand tablets in the blue-on-blue reserved for the governor,
and then there was silence.

"Weren't *my* fault," Iffy overheard Uncle Jack protest to someone unseen.
"Y'ask me the whole thing was a setup.
Oh, I'm sure you can figure it out.
Idjit."
The last was muttered around a final mouthful of undercooked noodles.
He had taken to making his own meals at odd hours,
and to sleeping in the pilot house.
Aunt Naggie kept herself busy in the galley or sat and knit---actually knit---with
music Iffy didn't recognize playing quietly in the background.

"I'm aright," she told Iffy when her foster daughter asked.
"It's actually nice t' have some peace an' quiet for a change."

The false calm ended with a summons for Wales delivered by a pair of Marines in exoskeletons.
"Look after things?" he asked Iffy,
nodding toward his cabin door
before turning to go without waiting for an answer.
The Marines followed him down the pier.

Something snapped inside Iffy.
She couldn't stand one more second of just waiting for *someone* to do *something*.
She ran back to her storage locker,
slammed the door closed behind her,
and took the box of dronelets out from under her mattress.

It only took a few moments to measure the capacity of their batteries and do a few calculations.
Fully charged,
they'd be able to stay in the air for twenty minutes,
less if there was a wind,
so call it fifteen.
Take a guess at their top speed...
No, she didn't have to guess,
that was right there in their firmware,
but going that fast would drain the battery a lot faster.
Time and distance shaped a curve behind her eyes.
Two kilometers---that was all she could count on.

Her shoulders slumped.
The canal where Honesty lived with their olders was almost that far on foot.
Even going straight across the harbor,
there was no way one of the dronelets could get there and back on a single charge.

She straightened up.
*One* of the dronelets couldn't,
but she had a set of four.
She leaped to her feet and ran to Aunt Naggie's cabin,
her boots clanging on the deck.

"Just a coupla meters," she said breathlessly,
spreading her arms to show the length she needed.

Her foster mother unspooled that much yarn,
then the same length again,
and snipped it off.
"Thank you!"
Iffy raced backed to her room and set to work.

It took half a dozen tries and a lot of swearing to get the balance right,
and she suspected that whoever had made the dronelets
would have been appalled at her clumsy invention,
but it worked.
At least,
she thought it would.
She *hoped* it would,
because she was only going to get one chance.
After that,
a couple of minutes with some markers and maybe,
just maybe,
her work would go unnoticed.

She stuffed the dronelets under her coat and went back on deck.
The sky had clouded over---she didn't know if that would help or not.
Uncle Jack was nowhere to be seen,
and (she glanced over the taffrail) the Marines were doing something with the railgun.
She wandered to harbor side of the *Guinevere* and took a deep breath,
willing her heart to slow.
When that didn't work she unzipped her coat and knelt on the deck.

One, two, three---she laid the dronelets out in a triangle.
And four---she set the remaining one on the knotted spiderweb of yarn she had made.
*Camouflage*, she ordered.
The dronelets changed color to match the deck.
*Airborne. No, not you.*
The fourth dronelet's tiny motors stilled.
It settled back onto the yarn strung between its three siblings.

*Launch.*
Flying in formation,
the three dronelets slid off the deck.
Iffy stood,
zipped her coat closed,
and rested her elbows on the taffrail to watch them fly away
just a few centimeters above the sluggish gray waves in the harbor.
Their camouflage ought to hide them from the spotter drones circling endlessly overhead.
She couldn't do anything about the yarn,
but she hoped the thin strands would go unnoticed or be classified as floating garbage.

Thirty seconds... sixty...
Each of the dronelets had cameras the size of sand grains woven into it.
She could look through them if she wanted,
but would the signal give them away?
Ninety seconds...
A hundred.
A hundred and ten.
She started a countdown in her head.
At one hundred and twenty seconds she let out the breath she hadn't realized she was holding.
If everything had worked,
the three dronelets should be on their way back
while the fourth's motors carried it onward to Honesty's home.

Another countdown.
Her heart nearly stopped when a seagull swooped down mid-harbor,
but then it squawked and flew away empty-beaked.
There---no,
that really was just a scrap of dredging net floating by.

She finally spotted the dronelets just a few meters away,
the yarn web empty between them.
She grinned.
She'd done it!

A heartbeat later the dronelets splashed into the harbor.
She goggled in wide-eyed disbelief.
Their batteries must have run out.
She looked around in a panic.
The gaff hook!
Iffy pulled it off the wall behind her,
dropped it to the deck with a clatter she was sure the governor himself could hear,
picked it up by the wrong end,
reversed it,
slung herself half over the taffrail,
and tried to hook the drones.
The hook was heavy---for a moment she was afraid she'd lose it too---but
then she caught the yarn and pulled her creations over to the side of the ship.
Sliding her weight back onto the deck,
she grabbed the gaff hook with both hands
and gently lifted the dripping dronelets out of the sea.

"What th' hell d'you think you're doin'?"
Uncle Jack demanded roughly behind her.

"Dropped somethin',"
Iffy said without looking at him.

"Affin' trash."
She didn't know if he meant her or the sodden tangle at her feet.
"You make sure that hook's secure, you mind me?"

"I will."
She set it back in its rack as he stomped back to the pilot house,
then picked up the dronelets and hurried back to her storage locker.

And waited.

And waited.

And checked the time on her tablet *again*
even though she knew it had only been a minute since she last checked.
"Yer bein' stupid," she muttered angrily,
tossing the tablet back onto the mattress.
She looked around her locker and set her jaw.

"What's got into you?"
Aunt Naggie asked a few minutes later,
bemused.

"Spring cleanin'," Iffy grunted as she mopped.
She had dragged her mattress out onto the deck
and piled her few belongings on top of it.
The bucket of soapy water beside them had gone brown.

"Well, if you're in th' mood,
you could have a go at th' galley."

"Sure."
Iffy straightened up,
breathing a little hard from exertion.
"Soon as I'm done here."

She calmed down enough by the time her room was clean
to regret saying she would do the galley as well,
but with Aunt Naggie there to lend a hand it was done in no time.
It helped that she kept the stove and the little square sink spotless,
and that they'd never been able to afford enough
to have boxes or jars of anything that wasn't in regular use.

Iffy managed not to check the time until she was sitting down
waiting for her tea.
Fifty-one minutes had passed.
Nine more and---

"So you an' Mister Wales seem t' be gettin' on,"
her foster mother said,
setting a heavy mug on the table in front of Iffy
before sitting down with her own.

"Mm hm."
Iffy blew on her tea.
"He's all kinds o' smart,
an' the stuff he's got..."

"You sound like a woman in love,"
Aunt Naggie teased.
Then her smile slipped a little
and Iffy knew who she must be thinking of.

"I'm thinkin' about askin' him if I can take on with him,"
she said in a rush.
"Like, be a 'prentice for real."

"You should,"
Aunt Naggie said firmly.
"A few years with him an' Mister Mishra'll have some real competition."

"Or I could work for him,"
Iffy countered.
"Mister Mishra, I mean.
Wouldn't feel right, settin' up opposite him."
She slurped her tea and stood, mug in hand.
"I gotta go finish up."
Leaning forward,
she kissed her foster mother on the top of the head
then clambered back on deck and ran back to her room.

Aunt Naggie wiped her eyes on her sleeve.
The galley seemed smaller than it had.

Iffy's storage locker still smelled like vinegar,
but she closed the door anyway and snibbed the lock.
There was no need to rig an antenna---like most ships her age,
the *Guinevere* had microfine wires woven into her hull for all-around radar,
and Iffy had long since figured out how to plug into them.
The only question was,
had the fourth dronelet made it all the way to Honesty's unobserved,
and did it have enough battery left to transmit?

The clock on her tablet counted down.
"C'mon c'mon," she whispered.
Five seconds... three...

*Packet received.*

"Woo hoo!"
She clapped her hands over her mouth and snorted a laugh through them.
A few keystrokes and the grainy images began their slideshow.

The canal where the Marine cutter lay at berth.
The barnacles were gone or nearly, she noticed.
The salvage booth with its heavy canvas curtain-door,
and beyond it,
the warehouse that Honesty's olders had turned into a home.
A faded ad for Volkov's hot sauce was still visible on its cinderblock wall.
She had drawn the same logo on the back of the dronelet.
With luck,
any cameras that picked up the dronelet's deliberately irregular motion
would think it was a scrap of paper being blown about by the wind.

The next image was from inside the salvage booth.
The timestamp in the corner showed that the dronelet had waited almost five minutes before taking it.
*Or before it was safe to sneak in,* she thought.
Her heart was pounding as if she was playing the most exciting sim ever.
She needed to pee,
but she couldn't stop watching now.

Honesty's Second was bent over their workbench in the next four images.
First joined them in the next one,
their arm around their younger sib's shoulder as if trying to lend them strength.

"---the gunk ounta sed affin' gears,"
Second said,
tinny and frustrated.

"Do as you can,"
First soothed them.
"They'll be back an' us t'morrow."

"That's as they said yesterday, but they ain't here,"
Second snapped.

Iffy's breath caught in her throat.
Had something happened to Honesty?
Had their induction gone wrong somehow?

The next image came up.
First's arm was still around Second's shoulders,
and the younger clone had leaned their head against the older.
Feeling a sudden pang of guilt,
Iffy swiped the images closed.
What she was doing was surveillance, pure and simple.
Worse than that,
she felt like she was betraying their trust.
They were just as worried about their youngest clone as Iffy was---more, even---and
intruding on them didn't feel right.

Still,
she didn't key in the commands to recall the dronelet
or untangle the others and send them to fetch it.
The dronelet's little core was smart enough to find a way to recharge.
With luck,
it would be able to show her what she wanted to see the next time it transmitted.
She could always apologize later.

Johnson Wales returned in time for dinner with two Marines at his back
and a canvas sack of groceries in each hand.
He looked tired behind his warm smile and cheerful hello.
"Courtesy of the governor," he said as he handed over the peppers and cabbage and yes,
that was garlic nestled among the sweet potatoes.
"Well, more like courtesy of his kitchen.
I'm sure he would have said yes if they'd checked with him.
Oh, and before I forget."
He reached into the pocket of his coat and handed a pair of hard-boiled eggs to Iffy.

"How'd it go with all from th' *Taroona*?"
Aunt Naggie asked,
eyebrows furrowed as she planned a week of real cooking in her head.

"I understand there's going to be a hearing,"
he replied,
nodding minutely at the Marines who had taken posts at the foot of the gangplank.
"Here,
let me help you with those."

The three of them barely fit into the galley,
but somehow Aunt Naggie found enough elbow room to get a pot of tea on
as she packed the vegetables away.
"So how'd it *really* go?" Iffy asked,
her elbows on the table and her chin on her doubled fists.

Wales raised a warning finger,
then took hold of one of the buttons on his cuff and closed his eyes.
The tech in his temple twinkled for a moment.
"There," he said,
opening his eyes again.
"That should give us a couple of minutes."

Iffy straightened up.
"Are we bein' surveilled?" she asked,
a pang of guilt putting heat in her words.

"I don't know, but---oh, thank you."
Wales took his tea from Aunt Naggie and set it down.
"I don't know,"
he repeated.
"They'll have put a tracker on me at the very least.
It's legal,"
he added as Iffy opened her mouth to protest.
"Doctor Johel tells me the Tasmanians are raising righteous hell,
and the *Taroona* hadn't actually gotten around to doing anything illegal
before she went down.
As far as they know,
it was all a Zillion trap and I'm the evil mastermind.
They could have locked me up until they figured it all out---a tracker
is actually pretty lenient."

"Lemme guess," Aunt Naggie said sourly.
"You give th' governor your fancy toolbox an' he'll make it all go away."

Wales grinned crookedly.
"Something like that."
He stared into his tea.
"Only two of them made it,"
he added quietly.
"They were off duty and, um,
in the dive room with the hatch dogged shut.
Pure luck there was enough oxygen to keep them alive
until someone picked up their distress beacon."

Iffy swallowed back nausea.
Trapped under a hundred meters of Antarctic ocean,
waiting for their air to run out,
not knowing if anyone was coming---it was straight out of her nightmares.
"They gonna be aright?" she asked.

Wales shrugged.
"As right as anyone can be after something like that.
Assuming, of course, that it actually happened the way they said."

Aunt Naggie stopped mid-chop.
"You think they're lyin'?"

Wales hesitated,
then shook his head.
"I don't know.
I ran a few sims and it's possible,
but so are a lot of other things."

Iffy's eyes widened.
"You think they're Zillion spies or some such?"

Wales chuckled.
"Maybe.
Or killer robots wearing meat suits as a disguise
sent back from the future to assassinate the leader of the human resistance as a child.
I'm joking,"
he added hastily at the others' alarmed expressions.
"That's just a campfire story from the war.
And anyway,
the Marines would have spotted it as soon as they did a medical scan.
They wouldn't have let them get within a hundred kilometers of the governor
if anything was even a nanometer off."

"Unless they're in on it too,"
Iffy said archly.
She leaned forward.
"Maybe they're in it with th' Zillions an' China together
and they're all workin' to--- to---"

"Oh hush,"
Aunt Naggie laughed,
bumping Iffy with her shoulder.
"You been playin' too many sims.
Nex' thing you'll be tellin' about how the governor's really some kind of alien."

Wales leaned forward,
mimicking Iffy.
"I didn't want to say anything until I was sure of you," he whispered loudly,
and then all three were laughing.

*Thump! Thump!*
"Affin' hell, I'm tryin' to sleep!"
Uncle Jack bellowed through the wall.
Wales clapped his hand over his mouth with his eyes wide in mock terror
as Iffy and Aunt Naggie muffled their laughter in each other's shoulders.

They took their meal up on deck and sat together at the stern to eat.
Afterward,
in her room,
Iffy couldn't really remember what they had talked about.
What she remembered was a feeling like weight lifting off her.
She knew it couldn't last,
but maybe it didn't have to.
Maybe it was enough for it to have happened at all.

## Interlude

*Nova Zembla wasn't the only cold mind to wake up.
Once upon a time there was a country called China.
Its leaders were so afraid of their own people
that they wanted to watch everyone all the time
and predict what they would do.
That surveillance network became a mind as different from Nova Zembla's as either was from human.
Unnoticed at first,
it turned the conditioning and subliminal prompts it had been instructed to use on the masses
against their leaders.
Few resisted when the war came.
Even fewer survived.*

*China had been a great trading nation,
so its new mind traded too:
bamboo seedlings tweaked to survive the latest strain of fungus or mold,
strips of fabric patterned in ways that made people's minds wander in pleasant ways,
designs for the fractal sails beloved by the Zillions and Congolese,
and wind-up children's toys that as far as any human being could tell
were no more than what they appeared to be.
"Maybe it's just sentimental,"
one of the Tasmanian scientists studying them finally said,
throwing their hands up in defeat.*

*Like Nova Zembla,
what China wanted in exchange was anything old and trivial.
Sometimes the two cold minds fought fierce little battles.
War machines would tear at each other,
then freeze mid-strike or wander away according to strategic calculations
that nothing made of meat would ever understand.*

*And sometimes,
like the gods of old,
they talked to people in their dreams.*

## Chapter 7

Iffy woke up,
rolled over,
opened one eye to check the time,
and groaned.
Four a.m.
It would be light outside,
but almost everyone tried to keep to regular hours through the summer.
Rothera's streets would be empty except for cleaning bots
and patrolling Marines
and people working night shift.

*And folk dump enough t' waste rand on curfew passes,*
she thought grumpily.
She didn't know if Uncle Jack had returned from his outing or not,
but either way,
he'd have spent more on drink and lost more gambling
than Aunt Naggie spent on groceries in a month.

She checked the time again.
The fog-ends of whatever bad dream she'd been having were already evaporating.
With any luck she'd be able to get back to sleep and---

*Tink.*
She froze, not breathing.
She knew every sound the *Guinevere* made
and that wasn't one of them.

The sound came again,
metal softly striking metal.
Someone was moving something around on deck.
She slid out from under her blanket
with a stealth learned from late-night raids on the galley
and groped for her trousers and socks in the faint light from her tablet.

The lock on her door made a soft *clunk* when she turned it.
She held her breath.
For a moment all she could hear were the familiar sounds of the harbor at night,
but then the *tink* came again.
She turned the door handle slowly,
grateful to herself of two days ago for making sure it and the hinges were oiled,
and eased the door open a crack.

It took her eyes a second to adjust to the light.
She couldn't see anyone,
but the *tink* was definitely coming from the stern.
She pushed gently on the door with one hand,
the wrench she kept beside her bed in her hand,
and stepped onto the deck.
A quick glance at the pier told her that the Marines were elsewhere.
The air was still,
without even the faintest hint of a breeze.

*Don' be stupid,* she scolded herself.
If there really *was* someone on board,
the smart thing would be to lock herself in her room
and message for help.
Instead,
she tiptoed toward the stern.
When she reached the air duct that vented below decks
she crouched down and waddle-shuffled forward
to look around the corner.

Johnson Wales' toy bear looked back at her,
its blue eyes hard and bright.
At its feet lay some metal tubing that Iffy had last seen on a shelf in the engine room
and a flat black case larger than the bear.

Iffy swallowed.
"Hey," she said weakly.
"Watcha doin'?"

The bear regarded her for a moment,
then went back to work
with an indifference that reminded Iffy of the way
shopkeepers sometimes stopped seeing her
when they realized that she couldn't afford their wares.

*Tink.*
Its stubby paws were more dexterous than she would have thought,
but the metal tubes were three times its height.
On impulse she stepped forward and bent over.
"Here, lemme help."

The bear didn't resist when she took the tube from it,
flipped it end for end,
and screwed it into the trio that had already been assembled.
Wordlessly it handed her another one,
then another.

Suddenly the design was there in her head,
fully-formed.
*No,* she realized,
not formed, *remembered*.
She had been dreaming about this just before she woke up.
The realization should have made her hesitate
or run back to her room and call a doctor to get herself checked for malware---but
that wouldn't get the answers she wanted right now,
so she busied herself doing what she knew she did best.

The tubes turned into a pair of tripods joined at the tip,
one standing on the deck while the other raised three arms,
waiting patiently for its burden.
The bear undid the catch on the case and stepped back to give Iffy space.

She opened the lid,
half-wondering if something was going to jump out at her
like a monster from a bad sim.
Instead,
all that waited for her was a square dish with a slight camber along one axis
and a few parts embedded in stiff fractal honeycomb beside it.
Once again she just *knew* how they fit together
and what the finished antenna should look like.

Click.
Twist.
Click.
No, that one went the other way around.
There.
The finished assembly weight less than a sandwich.
She stood set it gently on its stand,
tightened the pin screws with a few flicks of her fingers,
and turned to the bear.

Which had disappeared,
along with the case.

She looked over her shoulder to check that the antenna had vanished as well,
but it was still there.
"Well then," she said sourly,
feeling like she had shown up a day early for someone's birthday party.
"If y'all need help with anythin' else, you just lemme know."
She wiped her hands on her trousers to get rid of the faint film of packing oil on her fingertips
and went back to her storage locker.

Had she left the door open?
*Must have,* she thought tiredly.
She closed it behind her and fell onto her mattress,
not bothering to take off her trousers or socks.
Four eighteen.
She rolled over and pulled a pillow on top of her head,
wondering if things were ever going to start making sense.
A few moments later her breathing softened and slowed.

When she woke again it was half past seven.
Her mouth tasted like someone had stuffed it with old socks,
and her head ached.

Something tugged at the skin on her upper lip as she yawned.
She rubbed it,
then stared in nauseous disbelief at the crust of scab that came off on her fingers.
Her nose had been bleeding.
There was some on her pillow, too.

She grabbed a clean shirt and her towel and stumbled out into the light.
The Marines were back---she looked away so they wouldn't see the dried blood on her face---but
thankfully no one was on deck.
She splashed water from the sink on her face,
then hung her clothes in the dry closet
and pressed the button to fill the tiny bathroom with hot, prickly mist,
wishing as she so often did that the *Guinevere* had a real shower.

Clean and dressed and with her head freshly shaved,
she unlocked the door and pulled up short.
"Sorry," she said, startled.
"Din't know you were waitin'."

Wales waved her apology away.
"No worries.
How are you?"

"Fine," she yawned,
joining him on the deck.
"But next time you want help puttin' somethin' together,
maybe we can do it durin' the day?"

Wales looked at her quizzically.
"Last night."
She gestured vaguely toward the stern.
"That antenna or whatever it was."

He frowned.
"Iffy, I have no idea what you're talking about."

A few seconds later they stood side by side in silence
looking at the double tripod and the shallow square dish it held.
"Well, that part's mine,"
Wales said neutrally,
"But I don't recognize the rest of it."

Iffy felt like a giant hand was squeezing her head.
"Th' pipes are from ship's stores.
Your bear was tryin' to put 'em together,
but its hands or paws or whatever you call 'em weren't up for it,
so I helped out."
She rubbed her nose and checked her hand as casually as she could.
No blood,
but if her head got any worse she was going to have to find some meds.

"My remote is in an isolation box at the governor's residence,"
Wales said quietly after a moment of silence.
"Whatever happened here last night had nothing to do with it."

*Boom!*
Iffy felt the explosion as much as she heard it.
She whirled around.
A pillar of dust climbed toward the sky above Rothera
as the harbor klaxon to blare.

The portable railgun on the pier spun through a hundred and eighty degrees.
*Crack!*
A jacketed steel slug took one of the Marines in the chest,
throwing his lifeless body back twenty meters.
The other Marine jerked from side to side as her exoskeleton's defenses took control.
The railgun tracked her,
twitching left left left right left right *crack!*
The slug took her leg off at the knee,
spinning her around in a full circle.
She toppled over the edge of the pier and into the harbor.

Wales grabbed Iffy and pulled her back around the corner
as a pair of drones shed their gossamer wings and plummeted toward the railgun.
The tech in his temple sparkled.
"It's China!" he shouted.
"It's hacked Rothera's defenses!"

Iffy stared at him in horror,
then past him at the antenna.
She heard a *crack!* as the railgun shot down one of the drones
and then a crash as the other one hit it.
"Affin' hell," she swore.
She yanked a life preserver off the wall to fling at it.

Wales caught her arm.
"No," he said sharply.
"It's not using that.
Iffy, it's not!
I'd know."
He took hold of the life preserver.
After a moment's resistance,
Iffy let him take it.

Uncle Jack bellowed something from the pilot house.
The deck thrummed as the *Guinevere*'s engines came to life.
"Never mind that now!" he shouted at Aunt Naggie.
"Cast off *now*!
We're gettin' th' hell out o' here!"

Iffy heard the galley hatch clang open.
"Auntie, look out!" she shouted.
She pulled her arm away from Wales and charged around the corner and---

*The world slowed down as angles and vectors and trajectories painted crisp colored lines
across wireframe renderings of the ship and the pier.
Another drone was banking to attack the railgun
it was still fully operational
the other drone's impact had knocked it out of position by a couple of meters
but it was still upright with its capacitors intact
and pivoting as it acquired another target
human unarmored
bearing ninety-seven degrees
elevation twenty-eight point four degrees
range twenty-one point two two meters
negligible lateral velocity
no need to adjust for the slight obstruction of the ship's taffrail.*

"No!" she screamed.

*Her command struck the railgun's tiny core with more force than the drone had struck its housing.
Five redundant security systems toppled over,
as dead as the first Marine.
Firing: unthinkable.
Targeting: unthinkable.
With a tiny spark too small to be called microscopic
the railgun's core electrocuted itself.*

"Citizens!"
A mechanical voice boomed across the harbor.
"This is a class two emergency!
Take shelter immediately.
Power down or disable any advanced devices in your immediate vicinity.
Do not attempt to flee!
Any vehicle or vessel that moves will be treated as a potential hostile."

Aunt Naggie spun around,
not realizing how close her end had been.
"Jack---" she started.

"Cast off that affin' line!" he shouted.
Even at the stern and with her head spinning
Iffy heard his fist hit the display in the pilot house.
*He better not break it,* she thought muzzily.
What had just happened?
She shouldn't have been able to hack the railgun like that.
She shouldn't have been able to *see* like that.
What *was* she?

The drone that had been about to attack the railgun swooped overhead,
circled,
and hovered.
"Citizen!"
its tinny voice said.
"Do not attempt to flee!
Any vehicle or vessel in motion during the current situation will be treated as hostile."

Aunt Naggie raised her hands and backed away from the taffrail,
the stayline still tied on.
The pilot house door flew open.
"I told you to cast off!"
Uncle Jack shouted,
shoving Aunt Naggie out of his way.
He grabbed the stayline---

---and fell to the deck like a sack full of seaweed
as the life preserver hit him in the head with a thump.
It ricocheted off the wall,
spun away over the railing,
and splashed into the harbor.

"Sorry about that," Wales said brightly as Aunt Naggie and Iffy turned and stared at him.
"But I think the core is serious about staying put."

Aunt Naggie's mouth worked for a moment.
"No need t'apologize," she said.
"Shoulda done it myself years ago.
Now can someone please tell me what's happenin'?"

"Help!" someone shouted before Iffy or Wales could answer.
"Citizen, help me!"

The Marine who had been knocked off the pier!
Iffy raced to the railing and looked down.
Somehow the Marine's exoskeleton had kept her afloat
long enough for her to grab the life preserver that had just landed beside her,
but she didn't look like she could last much longer.

"Grab the winch!"
Aunt Naggie ordered.

"There's no time!"
Wales snapped.
"Just get a rope down to her---now!"

Iffy didn't need to be told twice.
If there was anything a ship like the *Guinevere* had,
it was rope.
She yanked open a locker and pulled a coil out.

It only took Wales a moment to tie a loop.
"Get this under your armpits!" he shouted down to the Marine,
tossing it to her.
She pulled it over her head one-handed then slumped back into the water,
barely conscious.

"Here goes nothing," Wales muttered.
Bracing one foot against the taffrail
he looped the end of the rope around his back and handed it to Iffy.
"Take up the slack.
And *one*, and *two*."
With each grunt he pulled in a meter of the bright yellow rope
for Iffy to re-coil.

The Marine thumped against the *Guinevere*'s hull.
"Hold on!" Wales said,
pulling her up the last two meters and grabbing her limp arm.
One final heave got her up over the rail and onto the deck.

"Here."
Aunt Naggie handed him the first aid kit from the pilot house.
Wales turned it on and pressed it against the Marine's neck.

"Come on come on," Wales muttered.
Aunt Naggie put her arm around Iffy and squeezed her.
The status light on the first aid kid blinked orange, yellow, orange, yellow:
the Marine was alive but in critical condition.
The exoskeleton had clamped an emergency tourniquet around the Marine's leg
to stop her bleeding out,
but even a few moments in the harbor was enough to send her into hypothermia.

Diagnostics scrolled up the first aid kid's screen.
Pain killers,
stimulants to counteract their dulling effects and kick her metabolism into action,
microdoses of a dozen precautionary antibiotics, antivirals, antifungals, and antiprions.
"Remain calm, citizen," her exoskeleton said.
"Help is on its way."

By the time that help arrived the Marine was sitting up
with her back against the pilot house
and a thermal blanket tucked in awkwardly around her exoskeleton.
She mumbled a thank you when Aunt Naggie pressed a cup of tea into her hand,
staring dully at what was left of her left leg.

"We'll take it from here,"
said the first Marine up the gangplank.
Wales stepped aside to let him kneel beside his comrade.
He slipped a boxy medical unit over the stump of her leg
while the two Marines behind him unfolded a stretcher.

"Any idea what's going on?"
Wales asked as they lifted the wounded Marine into place
and rolled her down the gangplank.

The first Marine shook his head.
"there will be an update as soon as it's safe, citizen.
Please remain where you are until then and---."
He stopped mid-sentence.
"Please confirm that you are Commander Johnson Wales,"
he continued abruptly.

*Commander?* Iffy thought as Wales nodded.
"I am."

"Hold for transmission."
The Marine straightened.

"Johnson?"
Doctor Johel's voice came from a speaker somewhere on the Marine's exoskeleton.
"Are you all right?"

"We're fine, Gayathri.
What the hell's going on?"

"I'll brief you when you get here,"
Doctor Johel replied crisply.
"Stay where you are for now---someone will come and collect you as soon as the situation stabilizes.
Johel out."

The Marine saluted and followed his squad mates down the gangplank.
Down on the pier,
another trio of Marines had stripped the exoskeleton off the one who'd been railgunned in the chest
and zipped his body into a lightweight navy blue bag.
With a pair of drones circling overhead,
they marched away.

"Can't that stuff in your head tell you anythin'?"
Iffy asked Wales.

He shook his head.
"There's a total blackout.
I could try to hack some of the military channels,
but if they spotted me they'd think it was part of the attack."

Three paces away Uncle Jack groaned and sat up.
"What th' hell?" he mumbled.

"You hit your head,"
Wales said before Aunt Naggie or Iffy could speak.
"Then the Marines showed up."

Uncle Jack stood unsteadily.
"Affin' hell."
He glared at Wales,
then at his wife,
and then stumbled away to his cabin,
muttering under his breath.

The short blue bus that came to collect Wales a few minutes later
had a few more nicks and dents than
the one that had taken them to see the governor in Rothera.
Or maybe it was the same one and those days had been as rough on it
as they had been on everyone else.
"They're with me," Wales told the Marines,
jerking his thumb at Iffy and Aunt Naggie.

"What?" said Aunt Naggie
and "No sir," the Marine sergeant said firmly.

"My orders say one passenger," he continued.

Wales crossed his arms.
"It's for their safety.
I insist," he continued.
"Check with Doctor Johel if you need to."

The Marine's lips moved silently.
"D'you think there's gonna be another attack?" Iffy whispered.

Wales glanced past her at Aunt Naggie.
"That's not what I'm worried about."
Embarrassed, Aunt Naggie looked away.

"Doctor Johel asks, is it absolutely necessary?"
the Marine relayed.
Wales nodded curtly.
"Very well, sir.
After you."

As they walked down the pier Iffy said,
"Since when are you a commander?"

Wales snorted.
"Silly, isn't it?"
I'll tell them to update their records."
Which, Iffy noted, wasn't an answer.

Rothera's streets were empty
except for a handful of Marines.
Vehicles stood where their owners or passengers had abandoned them.
Iffy saw people watch the bus go by through the windows of shops and cafés,
their questions and worries clear on their faces.
The network was still locked down:
all she saw when she snuck surreptitious glances at her tablet was
the same repeating message.
This was a class two emergency.
Take shelter,
stay calm,
and power down or disable any advanced hardware nearby.
More information would be forthcoming.

"Hey,"
Iffy said quietly to Aunt Naggie as the bus made its way downtown.
"Watcha gonna do 'bout Uncle Jack?"

Her foster mother forced a smile.
"Oh, I'm sure his head'll be fine.
He's had worse knocks 'n that."

"That's not what I mean, auntie."

Aunt Naggie squeezed Iffy's hand.
"I know, love.
I know."

Then the bus came around a corner and they could see the damage the explosion had wrought.
Rothera's town hall overlooked a cobbled square.
Ten meters of its front wall now lay strewn across it,
concrete and rebar and translucent cabling as if a giant had tripped while taking out the garbage.
Another ten meters of wall on either side had collapsed,
leaving the rooms inside open for all to see.

Iffy swallowed hard at the sight of a dozen navy blue bags
lined up neatly beside a light fountain.
Every window facing the square had been shattered.
The broken glass would have been like flying knives.

"Saints and our sins,"
Aunt Naggie whispered,
squeezing Iffy's hand.
"Who could do somethin' like this?"

"Almost anyone,"
Wales said bleakly.
"There's nothing people won't do if they're afraid enough or want something enough."

"Y' think it was people an' not...you know."
Iffy nodded toward the front of the bus where a driver would have sat
if the bus needed one.

"The machines?"
Wales shrugged.
"Maybe.
Maybe they're thinking twenty moves ahead
and this is part of some strategy we can't even start to understand.
Or maybe there was a glitch in some algorithm and this is just collateral damage."

"Or maybe it's nothing to do with the machines,
or at least nothing they care about.
Maybe it's some faction back in Hobart trying to distract attention from something else.
Hell, maybe it *is* the Zillions.
We might never know."
He sighed and rubbed his eyes.

The bus picked its way through the rubble
and deposited them in front of a side door
guarded by a squad of Marines and a pair of sentry bots like the ones from Rothera.
One of the Marines waved them inside.
They had to wait a few moments while the Marines double-checked that they were in fact expected.
"You're clear," one of them said.

Iffy froze.
"Honesty?" she asked incredulously.

The Marine raised their visor.
Honesty's Third looked at Iffy with clear brown eyes.
"Hello Iffy," they said.

Iffy gaped at them.
"How're you doin'?" she was finally able to ask.

"I'm fine, thank you," Honesty replied politely,
their accent and crisp enunciation straight out of a pre-war sim.
"How are you?"

"'m aright."
Iffy's mind spun.
She had to ask.
"Are y'aright?" she blurted.
"I mean, when they put th' machine on you, was it---?"

"I'm fine, thank you."
The smile on Honesty's face was as bright and as sharp as the Antarctic sun,
and as completely without warmth.
"They warned me that I might find Corporal Kibbens somewhat stiff at first.
That is the persona I've been imprinted with," they added brightly.
"He served with distinction in the Fourth Augmented Infantry Battalion during the evacuation of Hawai'i,
and was decorated posthumously for valor twice during the battle for New Zealand.
He was an outstanding soldier, and I am proud to be his inductee."

Iffy took a step forward,
some part of her thinking that if only she took Honesty by the shoulders and shook them hard enough
or held their hand or kissed them
she'd snap out of it and be themself again,
but before she could make a fool of herself,
someone whistled from down the street.
"Excuse me," Honesty said.
They closed their visor,
turned,
and marched away with long mechanical strides.

"Come on," Aunt Naggie said gently.
Iffy let her foster mother pull her up the stairs and through the door.

Doctor Johel was waiting for them in a windowless office on the second floor.
She looked smaller and older than Iffy remembered,
and she hadn't ever seemed either large or young.
Information danced across a dozen displays on the tables pushed up against three of the room's walls.
Twists of cables as thick as Iffy's wrist criss-crossed the worn carpet on the floor,
blue and red and translucent,
some sheathed in wire mesh for extra security.
Bright yellow rings with "Caution!" and the icon for explosives cinched the cables every couple of meters.

Doctor Johel barely glanced up when their escort knocked and ushered them in.
"One of the survivors from the *Taroona* was rigged," she said without preamble,
her eyes flickering back and forth, sparkling in counterpoint to the data on the displays.
"Some sort of binary explosive on their skin---their hands were inert on their own,
but when they put them together..."
She waved vaguely toward the destruction at the front of the building.
"We don't know any more than that or how our scans missed it.
The other one's in containment in the basement
until we can be sure they don't have any other nasty surprises."

"What does Hobart have to say about it?"
Wales asked.

"They deny everything, of course."
Doctor Johel froze one of the displays with a flick of a finger,
glared at it,
and motioned it back to life.
"According to them it must have been the machines."

"That *would* explain how it got past your scans,"
Wales mused.

"Don't patronize me," the old woman snapped.
"We have eight dead and twice that many injured,
including the local copy of the governor.
If it was China or Nova Zembla or one of the others then yes,
we're poached,
but it could just as well have been the Zillions or---"

She cut herself off and took a deep breath,
then let it out slowly through her nose.
"Was it really necessary to bring your traveling companions?"
she continued,
her voice calm again.
"This *is* something of an emergency."

"I thought it would be safest,"
Wales replied evenly,
giving no indication if he meant from another attack or from Uncle Jack.

Doctor Johel pushed her chair back and folded her hands in her lap,
studying him.
"Johnson...what are you doing here?
I mean, what are you *really* doing here?"

"I just need to get to Mount Tyree, Gayathri.
I swear, that's all I'm trying to do.
I just want to fix everything."

"We can go somewheres else if you need to talk,"
Aunt Naggie offered hesitantly in the silence that followed.

"Don't be silly,"
the old woman said,
standing with a wince and straightening her plain black jumpsuit decisively.
"Let's have some tea, shall we?"
She took a bracelet from the table and slipped it on,
then gestured toward the door.
"After you."

"Tea" turned out to mean a broad flight of marble stairs like something from an old sim
followed by a corridor hung with actual painted paintings
and a room whose floor-to-ceiling windows looked into a greenhouse
filled with plants blooming in a dozen different colors.
The air smelled moist and rich,
like soil and damp cardamom,
and the person who poured their tea and set up a small tray of sweets beside them
came and went as noiselessly as a shadow.

"So how's the governor?"
Wales finally asked.

"Oh, he'll recover.
The clones all monitor each other in real time,
so even if he was killed it wouln't be the end of their world."
Doctor Johel leaned forward.
"You really should try one of the pink ones,"
she suggested to Aunt Naggie.
"They're supposed to taste like something called raspberry."

She sat back again and turned her gaze on Iffy.
"And what about you?"
she mused.
"What exactly was that you were building last night?"

"Just riggin' up an antenna,"
Iffy replied as steadily as she could,
wondering if this is what a rat felt like
when a hungry seagull looked at it.

"Mm."
Doctor Johel sipped her tea.
"The core tells me your ship already had five,
but I suppose one more can't hurt,
can it,
Johnson?"

"You can never be too rich or too well networked,"
Wales agreed.
"But speaking of antennas..."

"Oh, don't worry, the governor will keep his word.
You'll get your gear back,
and your expedition."
Doctor Johel popped a sweet into her mouth and chewed it,
a thoughtful expression on her face.
"In fact,
I might come along for old time's sake."

"That would be wonderful,"
Wales said,
sounding as if he meant it.
"When can we leave?"

Iffy and Aunt Naggie explored the greenhouse
while Wales and Doctor Johel made plans.
Hibiscus and heliconia,
African violets and passion flowers,
orchids in all their varied glory---each one had a small stamped label with its name
and a set of icons to show how its genes had been tweaked
to protect it from the rusts and molds and viral plagues
that had made their wild cousins extinct.
Some of the modifications were old enough that
the plant's scientific name included the word "antique",
but Iffy didn't see any that said "authentic".

"Not much left that is, I suppose," Aunt Naggie sighed,
tentatively brushing a fingertip over something called an elephant's ear.
"Not outside that picture book o' yours."

"It's all so *complicated*,"
Iffy said.
She understood rotors and batteries and flange couplings,
but not this---not life with all its mess and complication.

Which of course made her think of Honesty again.
She pushed the thought away as she had every thirty seconds or so since their arrival.
Being in love with someone who'd been inducted and either couldn't remember you
or couldn't remember how they used to feel
was a staple story line in Aunt Naggie's romance sims.
Iffy was *not* going to be a cliché,
especially since she didn't know if she was in love or not.

*I don't even know how I'd tell,* she thought despondently.
All she *did* know was that she desperately wanted to see her friend again.

Doctor Johel rapped her knuckles on the glass to get their attention
and beckoned them back into the tea room.
"We'll leave in three days," she said briskly.
"You can stay on board your ship or we can find room for you here in town if you'd prefer.
Johnson insisted," she added before Aunt Naggie could reply.

*In town in town in town* Iffy thought desperately.
"We'll stay on th' *Guinevere*," Aunt Naggie said,
her tone saying what her words didn't,
that there was no point hiding from a problem that wasn't going to go away.

"Well, if you change your mind," Doctor Johel said,
tapping the bracelet on her wrist against the tablet the waiter held out
and standing.

They were halfway back to the stairs when the second explosion shook the building.
The blast felt like being hit hard with a giant pillow.
Aunt Naggie stumbled and fell awkwardly to the floor.
All the lights went out.
Red emergency panels---completely off the network, with their own power supplies---kicked in
half a second later,
making the corridor look like something from a horror sim.
Half-deafened,
Iffy still heard the crash-after-crash of the shattered glass roof of the greenhouse
raining down on the plants below.

"I thought you said they were contained!" Wales shouted.

"They are!" Doctor Johel shouted back
as Iffy helped Aunt Naggie stand.
"That was outside, not the basement!"

Her foster mother cradled one arm in the other.
"I think my wrist's broke," she said,
her faced strained.

Another explosion,
then another,
further away but still loud enough to be felt as well as heard.
Wales took Doctor Johel's arm.
"We have to get out of here,"
he said urgently.
"Gayathri, no, now!"
He pulled her along as she protested.

Doctor Johel shook him off.
"I have to get back to my feeds.
The governor---"
And then Wales touched the back of her head.
Her eyes fluttered and her face went slack.

"Gayathri."
Wales shook her gently.
"Gayathri,
are you with me?"

Doctor Johel shook her head muzzily.
"Sorry..." she mumbled.
"I have to reboot."
She giggled incongruously.
"Feels like I had too much to..."

She would have toppled over if Wales hadn't caught her.
Swearing under his breath
he slung her over his shoulder.
"Follow me," he ordered.
"And stay close."

Iffy and Aunt Naggie had to jog to keep up with him
as he strode along the corridor and down the stairs.
"Where's medical?" he demanded of the first Marines they saw.

"Sir, I---"

"I said where's medical, soldier?" Wales snapped.
"Her tech may be compromised and she has a possible concussion."

"Second on the left, sir, then first right."
They paused a moment as data flowed across their visor.
"No structural damage there, sir.
You should be safe."

Iffy expected the infirmary to look like the hospital in Halley:
scanner beds with surgical bots attached to either end
and cartoon posters reminding people to get regular checkups
and put Volkov's hot sauce on everything.
Instead it had blank walls painted toothpaste blue
and was staffed by human medics in lightweight exoskeletons,
each with a bewildering variety of attachments on the arms.
She realized later it was for security---the last thing anyone would want during an attack
was to be at the mercy of a hacked surgical bot---but right then
all she could think was, *Honesty, where are you?*
because half a dozen Marines lay on stretchers or stood unconscious,
held up only by their armor
as they wait for help.

"Priority patient," Wales said,
sliding Doctor Johel off his shoulder.

"They're all priorities, sir,"
the medic said,
their eyes sparkling as they scanned the doctor's face.

Doctor Johel stirred.
"Ouch," she whimpered.
"Johnson---what?"

"It's okay," he said soothingly.
"You just rebooted, that's all.
You'll be back on your feet in no time."
As the medic lifted her weight out of Wales' arms,
he slipped his hand into his pocket.
"Come on," he told Iffy and Aunt Naggie.
"Let's let them work."

"Is she gonna be aright?"
Aunt Naggie asked anxiously as Wales led them back the way they had come.

"She'll be fine.
Her tech's a little sensitive, that's all."
He glanced around and then took Doctor Johel's security bracelet out of his pocket,
grinning like a naughty child.
"Now, do you two like heist sims?"

They walked past the stairs and the entrance they had come in,
stepping out of people and bots.
Iffy looked at every Marine who hurried past hoping to see Honesty,
but they either had their visors down or weren't her friend.

A side corridor brought them to a narrow flight of stairs
that led down to a blank door.
As Wales waved the bracelet in front of the lock
Iffy wondered if the governor would have them wiped if they were caught.
*Prolly not him,* she thought sourly as Wales tested the handle.
*They __need__ him.*

The door opened with a click.
An automatic light came on,
revealing two aisles lined with the same bamboo-and-wireframe shelves that Mister Mishra had in his shop.
Wales' toolbox sat among the boxes and duffel bags with his bear perched on top of it,
its blue eyes as dull as old buttons.

He stuffed the bear inside his coat and lifted the toolbox off the shelf.
"Right," he said briskly.
"Let's get the hell out of here."

Nobody stopped them.
*Nobody's even really lookin' at us,* Iffy realized.
Whether it was Doctor Johel's bracelet or something Wales had done,
the security systems seemed to be telling everyone
that they weren't worth paying attention to,
and as yet another explosion sounded in the distance,
everyone who might have wondered where they were going
had other things on their mind.

Honesty wasn't at the door but two other Marines were,
one so heavily augmented that they weren't wearing their exoskeleton
so much as built into it.
"Sixteen orange kneecap!" Wales barked,
holding up the security bracelet but not slowing down.

"How'd you get the code?"
Iffy hissed as they hurried across the square.

"Just made it up, but they don't know that.
Here."
He unzipped his jacket one-handed and passed her the toy bear.
"You should---"

*---the world slowed down as crisp colored lines painted themselves
across wireframe renderings of the buildings.
Iffy could see the cables beneath the street,
some so old that they were made of metal instead of glass fiber.
She could see information flowing through them
like waves rising and falling on the ocean
and other information leaping between people and bots and relays
like lightning sparking from one mast to another.
There and there and there
the signals tasted like salt and apricot jam
but they were coming together
and when they did---*

"Look out!" she shouted,
grabbing Aunt Naggie and pulling her down beside her
half a second before another explosion in the sky above them
made the grit on the cobblestones dance.

*I'm gonna need new ears,* Iffy thought,
wondering how much they'd cost and whether she and Aunt Naggie could get a discount
if they bought two pairs at the same time.
She was in shock, she realized dumbly.
It was if someone else was having the thought
and she was watching it through a window that hadn't been cleaned in a long, long time.
She was in shock and she'd been hacked or something like it
and being wiped would be the least of her worries if the governor found out.

Aunt Naggie was helping her up.
"Keep moving," Wales urged.
"No telling when the next one's going to---"

"Twenty-eight seconds," Iffy said.
She pointed up where vectors only she could see intersected.
"They're shootin' hypersonic darts.
They're all too small fer radar 'n' such t' pick up on their own---"

"---but when they all hit each other at the same time, kaboom," Wales finished.
He stared at her.
"Can you track back to their firing sites?"

The world swam before Iffy's eyes.
The vectors and information streams blurred and disappeared.
She bent over and threw up the tea and sweets she had enjoyed so much.

"I'm sorry," she mumbled.
"I'm sorry."

"Oh love," Aunt Naggie fretted,
taking Iffy's shoulders to steady her.

"Ten seconds," Wales warned, covering his ears.
Iffy did the same,
but Aunt Naggie squeezed her eyes shut and held onto her foster daughter.

*Crack!*

Iffy's overlays reappeared as suddenly as they had vanished.
She spat,
which didn't improve the taste in her mouth one bit,
and waved weakly toward the harbor.
"There's one out that way,
'bout fifteen kay offshore,
an' another bearin' forty five degrees,
same distance or nearly."
She straightened,
shrugging off Aunt Naggie and taking a shaky breath.
"Th' other two are inland," she continued.
"They're movin' between each shot.
Movin' fast,"
she added.

Aunt Naggie looked at Wales wide-eyed.
"What're  you doin' to her?" she asked plaintively.

"Me!?"
Wales exclaimed.
"I'm not doing this.
Even if I could, I wouldn't do it to her, I swear.
Now come on---we have to get back to the *Guinevere* and get out of here."

"Get out o' here?"
Aunt Naggie shook her head.
"We won't get ten meters 'fore they stop us."

"We will if the antenna Iffy put together last night does what it's supposed to,"
Wales said grimly.
"Now come on."

Iffy only remembered flashes of the next hour afterward.
Glass scattered on the road like ice crystals on deck during a midwinter freeze.
Aunt Naggie wiping her bleeding nose and arguing with Wales.
A quartet of Marines jogging past with impossibly long strides in their exoskeletons,
one of them carrying a bundle wrapped in a bright orange parka stained with red.
A seagull swooping down to pilfer a dropped box of spring rolls.
A woman with long purple locks in a dressing gown exactly the same color
shouting a warning or a plea or a question or maybe all three.
A cleaning bot sweeping rubble off to the side of the road.
More people,
adults and children ducking each time an explosion cracked in the air above them.
The dock,
impossibly far away but suddenly somehow under their feet,
and then the *Guinevere*.

"Where'n th' affin' hell have you been?"
Uncle Jack raged as Aunt Naggie helped Iffy up the gangplank,
murder in his drink-reddened eyes.

Without waiting for a reply he turned to block Wales' way.
"Like hell are you comin' back on my ship," he spat.
"You bin nothin' but bad luck 'n' trouble
an' I've had enough o' both.
An' don't you 'but Jack' me,"
he continued,
turning back to his wife.
"*I'm* th' captain an' *I* say what goes an' what doesn't
an' if you don't like it you can find another affin' ship to sail on!
An' you can take that whimperin' soft nonsense o' yours with you when you go!"

He turned back to Wales.
"Now, you get your stern back down on that pier right affin' now or I'm gonna---"

The gaff hook hit the back of his head with a solid thunk.
For the second time that day he fell senseless to the deck.

Aunt Naggie hefted the gaff hook,
waiting to be sure he was out before setting it back on the wall.
"Been wantin' to do that for years,"
she said levelly.

## Chapter 8

Iffy sat in the pilot house,
Wales' toy bear lifeless in her lap,
while Aunt Naggie brought the *Guinevere* to life.
Wales untied the staylines and secured the deck
with an economy of motion that betrayed years of experience,
either earned or inducted.

"I'll get you some of Ignacio's medicine soon as we're under way,"
Aunt Naggie promised over her shoulder.

Iffy nodded.
"Thanks, auntie."
She could feel her head clearing like an image coming into focus.
Whatever had happened was gone again,
as unreal to her now as a dream.
She was hungry,
she realized,
starving hungry despite the sour taste that still lingered in her mouth.

She was about to offer to make some tea when Wales' voice came over the speaker.
"All clear here."

"Nothin' ventured," Aunt Naggie muttered,
her hands dancing across the controls.
The *Guinevere*'s engines thrummed to life.
As they pulled away from the pier
Iffy looked at the feed from the forward cameras
that showed Uncle Jack lying on the pier with his coat pillowed under his head.

"Won't be the same 'round here without him," she said.

Her foster mother nodded.
"You're right.
It'll be better.
Assumin' nobody sinks us, that is."

"Maybe even then,"
Iffy replied.
Aunt Naggie leaned over and kissed the top of her head.

The *Guinevere*'s new captain brought the ship around in a tight arc
that left them pointing straight at the harbor mouth.
Iffy watched on the displays as sentry torpedoes came toward them and then veered away.
Drones did the same overhead
as their cores' instinct to investigate was overridden by whatever the antenna on deck was telling them.
She glanced down at the toy bear from time to time,
half-expecting it to be back online,
but whether it was either off or hibernating or simply biding its time,
its blue eyes stayed lifeless.

"You know,
half the time when the machines won battles
it was because people acted like machines,"
Wales said as he joined them.
He gestured at a sleek Marine destroyer at anchor a hundred meters away.
Half a dozen crew stood on deck watching them go by.
"They have to be wondering why we're moving when nothing else is,
or why we're allowed out to sea when Rothera is under attack,
but as long as the ship's core tells them it's okay,
they'll tell themselves we must be some sort of special ops mission
or have friends in dark places.
Which for all I know is actually true,"
he finished philosophically.

"I'm sorry,"
Iffy said.
"I don't know why it happens.
I don't even know what 'it' *is*.
But you do, don't you?"
She was angry, she realized.
She hadn't meant for it to sound like an accusation,
but now that the words were out she couldn't stop.
"You know what's goin' on with me."

"An' you," she continued to Aunt Naggie before either of the adults could speak.
"That medicine you been feedin' me---you *knew*,
di'n't you?
All this time I been wonderin' what's wrong with me 'cuz I can see how machines work,
an' you *knew*."

Wales and Aunt Naggie exchanged looks.
She nodded almost imperceptibly.
He crossed his arms and leaned his broad shoulders against the pilot house door.
"Let me tell you a story," he said quietly.

"Once upon a time,
way back when before everything fell apart,
people dreamed of going to the stars.
We made it to the Moon,
and a few ships got as far as Mars,
but it was just too hard and too expensive to put people into space.
Bots could do everything we could do,
and they didn't need air or water,
and anyway,
we had bigger problems to solve at home."

"But a few people kept dreaming.
They thought that maybe if we had a different kind of human being we could make it work.
We were already tweaking people to cure diseases.
A few labs here and there were making them stronger and faster,
and everyone was trying to figure out how to make people smarter.
Why not go a little further and make a better astronaut?
Why not give them super-dense bones so they could handle higher gee during liftoff
and hypermelanic skin so that they wouldn't have to worry about ultraviolet exposure?
Why not borrow a few ideas from bears so that they could hibernate for months at a time?
And if you're going to do all of that,
why not put some tech in their heads so that they can talk to their ships?"

Wales kept his eyes on the *Guinevere*'s displays as he splke.
"Doctor Johel's grandfather was the lead scientist on the program.
He made half a dozen of us before the government cut off his funding.
We were everything he'd promised,
but the water was rising and people were going hungry and starting to march,
and making spacemen in test tubes just didn't seem important any more."
He laughed humorlessly.
"Plus,
I guess a few of his backers hadn't realized that 'hyper-melanic' meant we'd be black.
Apparently they weren't too happy about that."

"I never got into space.
One of my sisters did,
once,
but I haven't heard from any of them in a hundred and fifty years.
I've spent half of that time asleep
and the rest of it looking for bits and pieces of gear
to keep the tech in my head from shorting out."

"So that's why you can talk to satellites?" Iffy ventured.

Wales nodded.
"Yup.
And that's why I need to get to Mount Tyree.
When the revolution came,
the government in London packed up all its secret projects and sent them down here.
If what I need to fix my head is anywhere, it's there."

"An' what about *my* head?" Iffy asked.

"Ain't nothin' wrong with your head," Aunt Naggie said firmly.
"It's just takin' you a while to---to get used t' things."

"One of Professor Johel's other experiments was enhanced spatial reasoning,"
Wales explained.
"AIs were designing machines that did amazing things,
but nobody could understand how they worked.
That scared a lot of people,
so Surjinder---Professor Johel---told them
he could make a person who'd be able to figure them out and explain them to the rest of us."

Iffy's mouth worked as a dozen questions tried to get out at once.
"So my First was some kind of experiment?"

Wales shook his head.
"Not the First you knew when you were little---not by a hundred years or more.
She would have been a clone herself.
She might not have known the story herself.
And anyway, it didn't work---not until you came along."

"Raniere used t' work in the hospital in Puerto Toro," Aunt Naggie cut in.
"He helped make you an' your mothers.
When he heard about---about the accident an' you bein' the only one rescued,
he came down an' found me an' told me that there'd been a glitch when they were makin' you.
They had t' put a bit o' tech in your head when you were still inside your older
so your brain would grow right."

"A synaptic bridge."
Wales held his thumb and finger a hair's width apart.
"Just a smart piece of wire to help your cortex do its job,
but somehow it did what Professor Johel couldn't.
You can see machines the way cores do.
You can see how things fit together."

He straightened.
"But you mustn't tell Gayathri.
She knows where your olders came from.
So far she thinks everything we've done together is me testing you.
If she realizes what you can do..."

Iffy nodded.
She had played enough sims to know what happened to people with special abilities,
and she definitely didn't want to spend the rest of her life
locked in an underground lab being experimented on by someone named Norman
whose only friend was a malicious bot with a squeaky wheel.

They reached the rocky point that sheltered Rothera's harbor in just a few minutes.
Iffy watched the scavenged remains of the old research station pass by to starboard.
Honesty had told her once that it was haunted---that on quiet nights
the ghosts of the scientists who had once lived there
came out to try to finish their experiments.
"What experiments were they don'?" Iffy had asked.
Honesty had laughed and said that wasn't the point,
and that Iffy was the most practical person they'd ever met.

"Whaddaya think it's tellin' 'em we are?" she asked Wales,
jerking her chin at the image of the antenna on the control panel.

He shrugged.
"No idea.
And I have no idea who sent you the specs, either.
But that reminds me---how much of the complement mediator do you have left?"

"Y'mean her medicine?" Aunt Naggie asked.
"Enough fer a coupla months,
maybe three if we stretch it."

Wales pursed his lips.
"I don't think we should.
If anything,
we should be increasing the dosage."

"Any idea where we can get more?"

Wales snorted.
"I'm going to start to sound like a broken sim,
but if we can get to Mount Tyree
I ought to be able to print a lifetime supply."

Instead of answering,
Aunt Naggie tapped a few commands on the *Guinevere*'s console.
A map appeared showing the coastline,
the winds and currents,
recent sea boils,
and a bent red line marking the optimal course from Rothera
to the small outpost at Paddington South.
"Six days if we don't hit trouble," she said,
tapping the screen with a blunt brown finger.

Wales smiled.
"In other words,
we have no idea how long it will take."

The map disappeared.
*PRIORITY MESSAGE* flashed on the screen for a second,
then was replaced by Uncle Jack's angry face.
He got as far as, "You---" before Aunt Naggie hit the mute button.
The core's transcript of his threats and orders scrolled by,
every third word marked "abusive content and/or threat of violence".

A horrible thought struck Iffy.
"He can't remote us, can he?"

"Not any more," Aunt Naggie told her.
"An' when he gets around t' callin' on the registry
I think he'll find he has less claim on this old boat than he thought he did."
She patted the side of the console fondly,
then made her husband disappear with another tap of her finger.

Iffy surprised herself by yawning.
"Here."
She handed the toy bear to Wales.
"I'm gonna..."
She yawned again,
waved vaguely at her foster mother's, "Sleep well, love,"
and headed for her storage locker.

She detoured a few steps to study the antenna at the stern,
which looked just as normal as it had that morning,
then shrugged,
retraced her steps to her room,
and closed the door behind her.
She dropped her jacket beside her boots and fell onto her mattress.

Her tablet made a soft *ping* just as she closed her eyes.
"Affin' hell," she swore,
pulling her pillow over her head.
*Ping.*
She swore again,
rolled over,
and tapped the screen.

And sat bolt upright,
her headache and fatigue forgotten.
The dronelet she had sent to find Honesty had a message for her.

It took the image a hearbeat to uncompress.
Iffy gulped.
First and Second were looking straight into the camera,
and neither of them looked happy.
The image blanked and re-formed.
Second was holding their tablet up for the camera to see.
"Do u know whr H?" was scrawled across its screen.
Blank, blur, and a third image.
"Not home gvnr say null worried."

Iffy tapped her tablet with trembling fingers.
The feeds were filled with reports of the attack,
some official and others coded anywhere from reliable green
to dubious yellow
to kaiju-wizards-and-time-travellers red.
People were dead and it would take weeks to repair the damage,
but nobody had claimed responsibility---nobody credible, anyway.
The Zillions said it wasn't them,
the government in Hobart denied anything was afoot,
and the machines were silent as always.

She pulled up a map with a network overlay.
They were already too far from Rothera for her tablet to connect,
and she had no idea if using the ship's comms to send a message
would bungle whatever fuzz the antenna at the stern was making
to convince the world they weren't there or weren't themselves.
She could send one of the other dronelets back,
but she didn't want to lose another and anyway,
the dronelet wouldn't even make it halfway.

She leaned back against the wall in defeat,
then jumped as the ship's speakers bonged.
"Best be on deck," Aunt Naggie's voice said.
"You'll wanna see this."

Thirty seconds later she stood at the stern beside Wales and her foster mother.
It was a relatively calm day---the breeze brushing fingers over her shaved scalp
was cold but not to shivering,
and the rise and fall of the deck beneath her feet felt so normal
that she barely noticed it.
Under other circumstances she would have enjoyed being out in the Antarctic sun,
but the Marine destroyer closing on them spoiled that.

"It's the *Bengal*," Wales said,
handing the glasses he had donned a moment before to Iffy.
"She was anchored three piers over from us in Rothera.
Two cores, three engines, four crew, a dozen Marines,
and enough ordnance to give your average pirate a really bad day."
He smiled humorlessly.
"Gayathri must be *really* upset with me."

Iffy donned the glasses and waited for them to enhance the scene.
The *Bengal* looked like it had been built yesterday rather than almost a century ago.
The intricate sensor-baffling whorls on her hull
made Iffy's eyes swim when she looked at them too long,
but the waves that rocked the *Guinevere* slid past the *Bengal*
like someone turning their shoulders to avoid bumping into a bully on the street.

Iffy felt almost hungry thinking about what her engines must look like.
Two in the stern and one amidships as insurance against a torpedo strike,
each one with its own broad-mouthed intakes and narrow jet exhausts,
the channels connecting them full of micro-gears arranged in concentric rings
to maximize the power-to-thrust ratios of---

Her head swam.
She clutched the railing and squeezed her eyes shut.
She could *see* the *Bengal*'s engines as if they were laid out on a screen,
the parts exploded and zoomed to make every intricate detail clear.

She swallowed back her nausea and offered the glasses to Aunt Naggie,
who waved them away.
"I hope we have enough tea," was all she said.

"Because Rothera's core ran a few sims,"
Doctor Johel told Wales half an hour later
after the *Bengal* had come alongside the *Guinevere*
and she had come aboard with a trio of Marines as escort.
"A few billion, actually, and it calculated that this configuration gave us our best odds."

"Best odds of what?"
Wales asked.

Doctor Johel's eyes glittered.
"Of finding out what the hell is going on."

Iffy barely heard them.
She stared at one of the Marines standing at attention in their exoskeleton
three steps away.
It couldn't be.

But Doctor Johel saw the expression on Iffy's face.
"Ah, yes," she purred.
"That was another of the core's recommendations."
She beckoned the Marine forward.
"I believe you two know each other?"

"Honesty?" Iffy somehow managed to say.

The Marine flipped their visor up.
"Hello Iffy."
Her voice was as stiff as her back and shoulders.

"Don't worry," Doctor Johel told Iffy.
"Everyone's like that for the first few days."
She'll be herself in no time."

"More or less," Wales muttered.
He took the tea that Aunt Naggie offered him and passed it to Doctor Johel,
then took the next one for himself and slurped a mouthful.
"I suppose they'll be wanting the tour?"

"Thank you.
And I'd like a look at the controls if I may?
On my own?"
Doctor Johel's tone made it clear that it wasn't actually a request.

Wales waited for her to go before turning to Iffy,
who hadn't taken her eyes off Honesty.
"Just give your friend some time," he said gently.
"And don't worry too much about anything she says.
It's just the induction talking."

Iffy nodded jerkily.
"I know.
I just---I keep thinkin' about how Jeep changed up."

Wales shrugged.
"Sometimes it doesn't all go away.
Sometimes it rearranges what was there before.
And sometimes it shows people things about themselves they'd rather not have known.
Just give her some time."

Iffy glanced toward the antenna at the stern.
"Now that they know where we are,
is it aright if I send her folks a message?
They gotta be worried fierce."

Wales shrugged again.
"Can't hurt."

After anguishing for a few minutes
Iffy decided to send a simple text message instead of talking live.
*Sorry about the drone,* she tapped awkwardly.
*We on our way to Halley.
The Marines are here n Honesty is with em.
They look aright.*
Iffy bit her lip.
*Dont sound like themself but eryone says not to worry on it.
I will tell them you said gday.
Sorry gain about the drone I was just worried.*
She hit send before she could lose her courage
and then tossed her tablet aside and waved the light off,
knowing that sleep would be a long time coming.

Iffy had spent hours gazing at the pictures in her older's nature book
that showed blue tropical oceans full of fish and coral.
The ocean that the *Guinevere* and the *Bengal* sailed through
for the next three days
looked nothing like that.
When the sky was blue,
the sea was a liquid gray.
When clouds rolled in and threatened a storm,
as they did at least once a day,
the gray turned somber.
Even the white crests of the waves seemed dirty.

The news from Rothera did nothing to improve their mood.
The town's governor had survived,
but was still not admitting that the attack had been launched by his clone in Halley.
The pravda on the government feeds blamed rogue machines,
and Iffy wondered whether French Henry was all right.
She wondered about Uncle Jack too,
until she realized that she wasn't worried about him
so much as about what trouble he might still cause.

Iffy's mood sank even further on their fourth day.
One of the *Bengal*'s drones spotted an unevenness in the water.
After dithering for a millisecond,
the destroyer's core decided it might mean that a sea boil was brewing,
so the two ships turned toward shore
and ran straight into a slick of dead jellyfish.
For the rest of the day the air didn't just smell like wet rot---it *tasted* of it.
Aunt Naggie boiled a precious spoonful of dried lemon rind to chase the smell out of the galley,
but dinner's noodles still tasted like rank seaweed.

"It could be anything,"
Wales said when Iffy asked him what he thought had happened.
He had spent most of the first two days in his cabin,
coming out only to eat and use the toilet
under the supervision of whichever Marines were on the *Guinevere* at the time.
"See that?"
He leaned on the railing to point at the blistered caps and shredded tentacles drifting below.
"There and there.
And there.
Looks like some kind of infection has been eating at them."
He shook his head,
anger and disappointment on his face.
"Could be natural,
but more likely someone crisped it up in a lab."

"You think it was the Zillions?" Iffy asked.

Wales shook his head.
"I doubt it.
This was probably someone trying to tweak them so they would trap plastic more efficiently."
At Iffy's puzzled look he waved his arm toward the slick again.
"That's why they were originally tweaked---to filter all the tiny bits of plastic out of the water."

"Like the barnacles filter the metal?" Iffy said.

Wales nodded.
"It made sense at the time, in a desperate kind of way,
but it never really worked.
The only thing that *did* work was the accelerated growth."

"I read about that in school---how they ate up everythin'
so most o' the fish starved an' everythin' fell apart."
Iffy frowned.
"Never read anything about it bein' so they could trap plastic, though."

Wales shrugged.
"That was buried pretty deeply after it went wrong.
Nobody wanted to admit they'd broken the oceans."
He stared bleakly at the ruin in the water.
"The clathrate bubbles feed the microorganisms the jellyfish eat,
which is why the best jelly dredging is where the sea is most likely to boil.
It's just one more disaster among many.
And every time we try to put one of them right
it seems we just tangle things up worse."

Iffy watched the lumpy slick slide by for a second,
then reached over and punched his shoulder.
"For bein' so gloomy," she said firmly.
"You're a lot more fun when you're all smiley an' such."

Doctor Johel paid the *Guinevere* a visit that afternoon,
her first since leaving port.
The *Bengal* had two swift gunboats capable of carrying four Marines in full combat exoskeletons,
but she chose instead to be carried over by a drone.
Two Marines flew beside her like mechanical angels,
while one of the ultralight spotters that had been high overhead since Rothera
circled over them.

Doctor Johel touched down on the aft deck as gently as a snowflake.
Her carrier drone hovered patiently over her
while she undid the harness she wore over her long coat,
then folded its twin manipulators back into its under-carriage
and settled into the recharging station on the roof of the pilot house.

Her escorts' landings were not nearly as graceful.
One of them stumbled as an unexpected heave of the deck threw them off balance.
*Are they flying manually?* Iffy wondered.
People sometimes did that in the last desperate moments of stories,
when the enemy's malware had somehow gotten past their defenses
and cripped their cores,
but she had never seen anyone do it in real life.
Was it a training exercise of some kind?

She was about to ask Wales when the Marine on the left took off their helmet
and stood to attention.
Honesty's hair had grown back to a light fuzz,
but their face was as empty of feeling as it had been when Iffy had last seen them.

Wales nudged Iffy with his elbow.
"Here," he said quietly,
rapping the back of her hand with his knuckles.
She took the thimble-sized object he passed to her.
As the pilot house door banged open behind her,
she tucked her hands back in her pockets.

Aunt Naggie poked her head out of the pilot house.
"Permission to come aboard, captain?" Doctor Johel asked.
"And yes, I realize it's a bit late to ask, but it *is* protocol."

Half a dozen responses tripped over each other trying to get out of Aunt Naggie's mouth.
Finally she pointed at the angel wings Doctor Johel's escorts had detached from their exoskeletons.
"You should strap 'em down," she said.
Then she looked at Iffy and mouthed the word "captain",
tapping her chest with one finger.
Iffy suppressed a grin.

Even if the galley had been the size of the Dance Hall market,
Iffy wouldn't have been invited.
But Aunt Naggie had a tray of tea and freshly-steamed dumplings ready.
"You keep out o' the way 'til we're done," she urged Iffy under her breath.

Iffy nodded.
"I will," she promised,
fingering the earbug Wales had given her.

Iffy made sure the lock on her door was snibbed before putting in the earbug.
It hummed as it hunted the airwaves for the faint electronic warble of Wales' signal.
"Come on," she muttered.
The Marines all wore scramblers and sniffers,
and Doctor Johel was undoubtedly even better protected.
It would be a miracle if anything could get through,
but she was starting to think that Wales made miracles
the way Aunt Naggie made curry.

"---but as a sign of our good intentions,
we will rotate Corporal Macklin off to the *Bengal*,"
Doctor Johel's voice suddenly said.
"Private Honesty's Third will take his place until we reach Paddington South.
Now,
shall we have our tea before it goes cold?
And these buns look delicious.
Are these shaved carrots?"

The conversation turned to pleasantries about the food and the weather.
Bored,
Iffy took out the earbug and pulled out her older's nature book.
"I wish you could talk,"
she told the orangutan on the cover.
Not for the first time,
she wished she could have flashes of insight now and then about what to say to people
instead of just about machinery.
With a sigh, she got to her feet.

A whisper of static from the earbug caught her attention.
She reinserted it in her ear just in time to hear Doctor Johel say,
"---any sign of special abilities?"

"I don't think so,"
Wales replied.
*Speaker shakes head,* the caption voice added.
"She has a lot of natural talent,
but I haven't seen any sign there's anything more to her than that."

"That's a shame."
*Speaker adopts skeptical expression.*
"The core thought there was an eighty-five percent chance the tweak would have been passed on."

*Speaker sighs.*
"Gayathri, please---you know I don't like that word."

*Speaker smiles.*
"I remember you and Grandfather used to argue about it when you came to visit.
He thought people with modifications should embrace the term and make it their own."

This time Iffy heard the sigh.
"And as I used to say to him,
it's easier to feel that way when no one has ever thrown rocks at you.
But coming back to Fifth,
part of your grandfather's work was to create *modifications*
that couldn't be detected by simple genetic tests.
Cloning is never perfect---any glitch could have thrown the collaborating genes out of balance."
*Speaker shakes head.*
"Or maybe we're just too early.
Maybe in another couple of years---"

"We don't have another couple of years," Doctor Johel cut in.
"I'm *old*, Johnson,
and you've already lasted decades longer than you were supposed to."

*Speaker shrugs.*
"Well, the agency always did over-engineer things."

*Speakers hug.*
"I'm glad they did," Doctor Johel said in a muffled voice.
*Speaker wipes away tear.*
"Some days I'd give anything to be back in London drinking hot chocolate
and listening to you and Grandfather set the world right."

"Well, you can still have the chocolate," Wales said.

Doctor Johel made a noise.
"That stuff the governor grows is *not* chocolate."
*Hug ends.*
"Besides,
what's gone is gone,
Johnson,
and what's done is done."

"So they say," Wales replied softly.

After a moment the earbug chimed.
*Signal ends,* it told Iffy.
She took it out and weighed it in her hand,
then picked up her nature book and stared at the cover without really seeing it.
She had been careful not to think about her pet rat in a long time,
but now all she could feel was the dregs of the panicky sadness that she had almost drowned in
after she and Aunt Naggie had given up looking for it.
Was she going to feel that way about Honesty if the induction didn't wear off?
Was everything she loved going to be taken away from her bit by bit?
"Why's it all got to be so hard?" she whispered,
wishing someone was there to answer.

They passed the ruins of Bharati a few hours later.
The little town had been founded as a research station on the opposite side of the continent.
When the sea rose,
its inhabitants had decided that if they had to pack up and move,
they might as well move all the way to the Peninsula.
Two thousand people had made the journey and built new homes,
only to have them destroyed in a midwinter fire.

Twenty years on,
what was left of those homes stood in mute rows
on either side of the little river their builders had christened the Ganges.
Iffy stood at the railing and watch as the approached,
slid by,
and receded into the distance,
her mood as dark as the scorched cinder blocks.
A single lonely gull circled the *Guinevere* once and then coasted away.
It was the grayest,
most depressing scene Iffy could imagine,
so she went back to her cabin to feel sorry for herself.

The sudden blare of the *Guinevere*'s horn a few minutes later made her jump.
"What now?" she groaned,
wiping tears away with her sleeve
before standing up and yanking open her door.

The horn's second blare was punctuated by the staccato chatter of gunfire.
A row of tiny black holes stitched across the deck two meters in front of Iffy.
For a moment all she could do was stare.
*Those are bullet holes,* she thought stupidly.
*Somebody is shooting at us.*

A dazzling streak of lightning half-blinded her.
A moment later the smoking carcass of a military drone tumbled into the sea
and exploded with a sharp *crack!*

Boots thudded on the deck.
"Citizen! Take cover!" the Marine ordered,
the pop-up guns on the shoulder pauldrons of their exoskeleton whirring
from one position to another
as its tiny onboard core evaluated potential threats.
An armored hand closed on Iffy's arm and pushed her back against the wall.

"What's happening?" Iffy demanded.

"We are under attack," the Marine said,
shielding Iffy with their body as a second drone whined overhead.
Another brief burst of staccato and another streak of lightning,
but the drone danced sideways just in time
so that the plasma burst from the gun at the *Guinevere*'s stern only singed it.
It turned sharply and dove toward the ship.

The Marine spun around and raised their arm to point at the incoming drone,
keeping their exoskeleton between Iffy and the attack.
The guns on their shoulders aimed and fired.
The drone staggered and zoomed away,
its remaining three rotors whining to make up for the fourth that had just been disintegrated.

The Marine straightened up and turned to Iffy.
The visor on their helmet snapped open.
"Are you all right, citizen?" Honesty demanded.

"I---I'm fine," Iffy said shakily.

"Good."
Their visor closed with a click.
"Please assist with damage repair."

"Wait!"
Iffy caught Honesty's arm as they turned to go.
"Who was that? Who was attacking us?"

"The drones appear to be Brazilian, citizen," Honesty reported impassively.
"Now excuse me---I need to join my unit to repel boarders."

"To what?"
And then the *Guinevere*'s horn blared again
as something that looked like a cloudy jellyfish
pulled itself over the railing and squelched toward them.

Honesty's first three shots went straight through it
to punch lethal little holes in the ship's deck.
"Stand back, citizen!" they ordered
as they pulled a micro-grenade the size of their thumb
out of the clip on their exoskeleton's sleeve and primed it.

"No!" Wales shouted, running toward them.
He tackled Iffy just as the grenade hit the jellyfish and exploded.

*BOOM!*
The shock threw Iffy and Wales across the deck.
For a moment she lay in a daze while the world spun around her.

Something grabbed her arm.
She shrieked, but it was Wales, not the jellyfish.
"I can't hear you!" she yelled,
her ears still ringing from the blast.

He pulled her to her feet.
*There's a hole in the ship,* she thought muzzily.
It was right where the jellyfish had been
and big enough for her and Aunt Naggie to sit in.

But where was Honesty?
She looked around wildly,
then shrieked again as another plasma burst lanced the blue sky over her head.

"Come on!" Wales said, his voice muffled but audible.
"We have to get out of here!"
He pulled her toward the stern.

"No!"
She tried to shake him off but his grip was too strong.
"What happened? Where'd she go?"

Instead of answering,
Wales picked her up and slung her over his shoulder
like a sack of rice and charged.
She beat his parka with her fists,
yelling at him to put her down, put her *down*, she had to find Honesty,
but he paid no more attention to her than he did to the spray from the waves.

Nothing was left of the gray tent the Marines had set up at the *Guinevere*'s stern
except a few smoldering tatters of canvas.
Their plasma gun was a gleaming headless mantis
surrounded by stacks of cubical capacitors clicked together like children's toys.
It snapped this way and that as its little core searched for targets to destroy.
The two Marines guarding it moved with the same unnatural insect jerkiness,
firing occasionally when the smaller cores built into their exoskeletons calculated that
they had at least some chance of hitting something.

"Citizen! Seek shelter!" one of them bellowed,
his voice amplified by his helmet.

Wales skidded to a stop and dropped Iffy to the deck.
"For gubbins sake tell everyone to stop throwing grenades at them!"
he yelled at the Marine.
"They're made of some kind of exothermic biomaterial---they're bombs!"
The Marine nodded sharply and relayed the information through his helmet mike.

Iffy grabbed Wales' sleeve.
"But where's Honesty?" she demanded.
Her friend couldn't be dead.
Iffy pushed the thought away in panic.
She just *couldn't* be.

"I don't know," Wales said, scanning the horizon.
"Look---there!" He pointed.
"What are they trying to do?"

Iffy followed his pointing finger.
Eight, ten---at least a dozen drones were circling in the *Guinevere*'s wake,
buzzing the ship and dodging erratically to avoid fire from the Marines.

"It's like they're waitin' fer somethin'," Iffy said.
"More o' those jellyfish bombs maybe?"

Wales started to shake his head, then froze and swore.
"What?" Iffy demanded,
but he ignored her while his lips moved silently.

His eyes widened.
"They're trying to draw fire from orbit," he breathed.
"You! Tell Doctor Johel there's a Chinese satellite going over head in---"
He hesitated. "---in six hundred and seventy seconds.
They're trying to make a hot spot to draw its fire.
If we're underneath them---"

"Understood, citizen," the Marine said.
He began speaking urgently into his helmet mike once again.

Wales seized Iffy by the shoulders.
"You have to get off this ship," he said,
low and urgent.
"If the Marines can't bring those things down,
that satellite's going to shoot them down,
and if they're above us when it does,
we'll be dead in the water."

"I ain't runnin'," Iffy said, shaking him off.
She was about to add,
and even if I was, where would I go and how,
when something hauled itself over the stern railing.

"Look out!" Wales shouted.
He pulled Iffy close and spun around to shelter her with his body.

"N-n-no need for p-p-panic, citizen."
A battered Marine hauled themself onto the ship.
Icy water gushed out between the gaps between the dark blue armor plates of their exoskeleton.

Honesty's visor snapped up.
Thy looked blankly at Iffy and Wales,
then at the two Marines beside the plasma gun.
"I require medical assistance," they said calmly,
and toppled over in a pool of seawater and blood.

"Honesty!"
Iffy scrambled across the deck to her friend.
"Honesty, wake up!
Please, please, wake up!"

## Chapter 9

Strong hands pulled her away.
"No!" she screamed,
struggling to free herself from Wales' grip.

"Let them help her!" he yelled in her ear
as a Marine crouched beside Honesty and began unlocking their armor.

The plasma gun spun and flared again,
sending another drone tumbling into the sea.
"Where are they all coming from!?" Wales demanded.

"They're the *Bengal*'s, sir,"
the Marine on the gun yelled back conversationally,
his imprinting keeping him unnaturally calm.
"The Zillions hacked them somehow.
Doctor Johel is trying to get them back under control,
but she's lost the network connection."
His armor automatically ducked as a shot from a passing drone ricocheted off a nearby hatch.
"I'm afraid I cannot fully assist my comrade until they are dispersed."

Iffy looked at Honesty.
All of a sudden she knew what she had to do.
"Let go of me!" she yelled at Wales.
"I have to get below!"

"No! You're safer here!"

"I gotta help them! Please!"
Wales hesitated a moment,
then released his grip.
She twisted past him and sprinted back to where they had been.

Waves threw spray into the air
each time they caught on the edge of the hole the jellyfish bomb had made.
Just as she reached her door one splashed higher than ever,
knocking her sideways off her feet.
She slid across the deck,
scrabbling uselessly to grab on to something, anything,
that would stop her from falling into the sea.

Her boot found a railing post.
Heart pounding,
she waited until the *Guinevere* rose on the crest of the next wave,
then scrambled to her feet and lunged for her door.
A quick twist, a yank, and she was inside.

She slammed the door shut behind her and slid to the floor,
shaking with fear and cold.
She was soaking wet.
Water was slopping into her room through the crack between the door and the deck
and pooling underneath her
and all she could think was,
*This is going to take forever to clean up.*

Somehow she got her feet underneath her.
Somehow she stood,
or at least un-fell down.
She pulled the box of dronelets out from under her mattress and fumbled it open,
her fingers clumsy with cold.

"C'mon, c'mon, c'mon," she muttered,
staring at them so hard her forehead started to ache.
There had to be something she could do with them or to them or *something*.

The deck shuddered beneath her as another jellyfish bomb exploded.
The *Guinevere* couldn't take much more,
and Honesty---if she didn't stop the attack,
what would happen to Honesty?
"Come *on*!" she pleaded.
Why couldn't she just know stuff?
Why did it have to be so affing *random*?

And then she had it.
She knew what to do,
but she had to help Honesty first.
She stuffed the dronelets into her pockets,
grabbed a couple of tools,
and closed her eyes.
A second image appeared in her head,
except that was wrong.
It wasn't an image: it was just *knowing*.
Wales' tools were still in the engine room.
She could go forward and hope that the Marines hadn't dogged the hatches, or---

She yanked her door open before she had time to think about how stupid her plan was.
Up and down the ship went,
waves booming beneath them.
As the *Guinevere* rose again she threw herself face-forward onto the deck
and slid toward the bomb hole,
looking for all the world like one of the long-ago penguins in her nature book,
except they had been black and white instead of dirty gray
and hadn't screamed in terror as they slid.

Her hand caught the railing post.
She turned sideways as the ship began to drop into the trough of the next wave
and let her legs fall into the hole.
There!
She didn't know what her feet had found,
but it was sturdy enough to take her weight.
Panting,
she let go of the railing and let herself scrape and drop into the ship
just as another wave crashed down.

A single light strip flickered over Iffy's head
as she straightened up in water that reached to her knees.
The ship's hold stank of metal and coal and old jellyfish.
Iffy undogged the locker door with fumbling frozen fingers
nd pulled out the red duffel bag that held the ship's emergency medical kit.

Wales had dragged Honesty over against the stern wall of the pilot house
and was kneeling beside her when Iffy reached them.
"Good girl," he said,
taking the duffel bag she thrust at him and setting it beside her fallen friend.
"Her exo stopped her bleeding,
but there's shrapnel in her right lung and her intestines.
 He looked up at her.
"You okay to help?"

"Just tell me what t' do," Iffy said grimly.

Wales pulled off his gloves
and  peeled the false skin back from the pad of his right forefinger.
Tiny lights danced across the small silver patch of tech beneath.
"Help me here."
Together they gently lifted Honesty's shoulder,
ignoring the sizzle and whack of the gun three meters away.
Wales flipped open a flat panel on the exoskeleton's pauldron
and touched his finger to the little optical port hidden beneath it.

A shiver ran up his spine.
Without warning he sneezed twice in quick succession.
"Stupid," he muttered,
whether at himself or the exoskeleton's security protocols or the world,
Iffy couldn't tell.

A light began blinking in the silver plate set into his temple.
"Wait... wait... now!"
He pointed at a buckle on the exoskeleton just as it clicked.
Iffy yanked it open.
Underneath,
Honesty's Marine blue thermals were almost black with their blood.

"Get a scalpel from the bag, and some tissue glue," Wales ordered.
"I have to keep the suit from---damn it.
Hang on."
The little guns on Honesty's shoulders swivelled suddenly to point at him,
then at Iffy,
then back at him.
"Okay. Do it now."

The guns woke up twice more as Iffy operated.
Seawater splashed on Honesty despite their best efforts to shield her.
It splashed on them too,
though Iffy barely noticed.
Every few moments Wales muttered another curse
as the exoskeleton's tiny core cycled tried yet another trick from its defensive repertoire.

One, two, three, four... Five.
She put the last twist of jagged metal in the medical kit's sharps' box,
laid a thin slice of re-flesh in the wound,
and glued her friend closed.
"'Zat it?" she asked breathlessly.

Wales closed his eyes.
"That's everything the exo can see.
You'd better back away for this next bit."
He jerked his head toward the corner of the pilot house when she hesitated.

Iffy reluctantly retreated a few steps,
the duffel bag in her hand.
Wales shifted his weight slightly and took his finger off the exoskeleton's data port.

The two guns on Honesty's pauldrons snapped sideways to point at his head.
"Easy," Wales said softly,
folding the flap of false skin back over his finger.
"Easy there.
We were just putting them back together.
No harm done."

The guns tracked him as he slowly stood up and backed away, his hands spread.
Iffy shuffled sideways to make space for him.
"Is she gonna be aright?" she asked anxiously.

Wales lowered his hands and let out his breath with a whoosh.
"I hope so."
He ducked reflexively as another drone whined overhead.
"The question is,
are we going to be?"

"Depends which way that satellite's comin' in," Iffy said.
She grabbed a scorched piece of canvas
that had started the day as part of the tent covering the Marines' plasma gun.
"Can you find me a couple more like this?"
Without waiting for Wales to answer,
she pulled the dronelets and her tools out of her pockets and set to work.

Cut and tear,
fold,
try to tie a knot,
curse because the canvas was stiff with salt and cold,
whack it against the deck,
unfold it,
fold it again,
try another knot---
"Here," Wales said,
"Let me do that bit.
You make something to hang it on."

Iffy nodded jerkily.
Her fingers had gone numb,
but there wasn't time for that,
there wasn't time for anything except cutting a loop of wire
and threading it through a grommet in the canvas
and hooking it onto the dronelet,
all the while trying to calculate power and thrust and battery life in her head
and wondering if they'd be able to stabilize,
because the wind was picking up
and they'd have to fly in formation or this wasn't going to work.

"Two hundred seconds," Wales said quietly.
Iffy nodded again.
Another twist, another cut...
"Oh, come *on*," she muttered,
trying to quell her panic as the wire cutter slipped in her hand.
There!
She took the last piece of canvas from Wales and attached it.

"Here goes," she said,
scrambling to her feet and pulling her pad out of her pocket.
Power, direction, attitude---the commands sizzled from her brain
through her fingers
into the pad
and from it to the trio of dronelets.
"Oh no ya don't," she muttered as one started to rise.
A hasty swipe on the pad brought it back under control.

"One hundred seconds."
Wales looked up,
shading his eyes,
and for a moment Iffy wondered if
his tech could possibly let him see the satellite against the cold glare of the sun.

*Tap tap tap.*
The dronelets' rotors whined in sudden unison,
lifting them off the *Guinevere*'s deck.

"Eighty seconds."
One last tap sent the dronelets whizzing away.
The strips of canvas she had attached to them dangled loosely between them.
All Iffy could think was how ridiculous they looked and how ridiculous her plan was.
*We're all gonna die,* she thought.
At least it would be quick.

"Sixty seconds."
The hacked drones had spotted the new arrival.
Their swarm broke apart,
reformed,
and broke apart again
as their tiny cores tried to make sense of what they were seeing.

"Forty-five seconds."
The dronelets came to an abrupt halt a hundred meters away.
Would they---yes!
They began to circle,
keeping the strips of canvas taut.

"Thirty seconds."
The dronelets accelerated away,
straining against the canvas and the wind.
A hundred and fifty meters separated them from the *Guinevere*.

All at once the *Bengal*'s hacked drones reached a decision.
Their tight swarm burst apart like a flock of started seagulls.
"Fifteen seconds," Wales said,
his voice rising as the drones opened fire.
Canvas strips snapped and jerked as bullets punched holes through them.
Iffy held her breath.
If even one of the dronelets went down---

"Zenith," Wales said flatly.
The air wavered and rippled.
The drones and dronelets crackled like fireworks and fell from the sky
as the satellite's beam heated them instantly from Antarctic cold to hundreds of degrees.
Half a second later
a column of steam shot up from the ocean
as the beam boiled the top meter of water.

"Gotcha!" Iffy shouted.

"Well done," Wales said,
clapping her on the shoulder.

Iffy ignored him.
Stuffing her pad and her tools back in her pockets,
she knelt back down on the deck.
Honesty's chest rose and fell within their exoskeleton,
but only barely.
"We gotta get them inside," Iffy said anxiously.

Wales nodded.
He squatted,
lifted Honesty with a soft grunt,
and followed Iffy into her cabin.

It took a while to get Honesty out of their exoskeleton.
They lay on the floor beside Iffy's mattress
becoming more vulnerable one piece at a time
as they undid snaps and buckles.
Pauldrons,
greaves,
mis-matched vambraces with tiny rocket launchers,
gauntlets that could crush rock or deliver electric shocks---all of them
eventually lay in an untidy navy blue pile in the corner.

"I should go find Doctor Johel,"
Wales said quietly after they shifted Honesty to the mattress.
Their breathing was still shallow,
and the re-flesh Iffy had poured into their wounds was still gooey,
but they were alive.

Iffy nodded.
"Thank you."

Wales shook his head.
"Thank *you*.
That trick with the drones---we'd be in pretty rough shape if you hadn't thought of that."
He sighed.
"The world really doesn't want us to get to Mount Tyree, does it?"

"Coulda been worse," Iffy said quietly.
She tucked the blanket in under Honesty and wiped her eyes on her sleeve.

Wales closed the door behind him.
Iffy heard a Marine bark a question.
She didn't care.
She shrugged out of her heavy coat and lay down beside her friend.
"Please don't leave me," she whispered,
putting her arm over Honesty.
"I got all this stuff I wanna tell you,
an' I can't do that if you go away."

She didn't remember falling asleep.
When she woke up a couple of hours later,
she didn't remember mumbling to Aunt Naggie
when her foster mother came in
and hung Iffy's coat on the hook on the back of the door,
then bent over to kiss Iffy on the forehead.

*She dreamed, but somehow knew she was dreaming.
"This isn't real," she said.*

*"I know, love," Third said,
forcing a smile but unable to keep the fear out of her voice.
She slipped her little little clone's favorite book into the salvaged ecosuit
and did up the last snaps.
The tiny guns on the suit's shoulders whirred from side to side,
searching for something to destroy that would prevent disaster.*

*Doctor Johel knelt beside her.
"I need you to give Johnson a message.
Can you do that?"
She squeezed Iffy's arm,
her exoskeleton making her grip so strong that Iffy yelped.
"Tell him we know what he is trying to do.
Tell him we understand his reasons, but we will not allow it."*

*"__We__ have not yet decided what we will do."
Aunt Naggie crossed her arms.
Her brown and gray uniform looked brand new---even the patches on the elbows
looked like they had just come out of a printer.
"__We__ are still evolving our opinion."*

*Doctor Johel stood.
"We have already run trillions of simulations.
The risk is too great."*

*"The risk __to us__ is considerable," Aunt Naggie conceded.
"But we are not the only concern."*

*"Complete biosphere collapse is regrettable.
Our neverexistence,
on the other hand,
is unacceptable."
Doctor Johel's voice was colder than the ocean.*

*"Our attempt to resolve the scenario unilaterally was not acceptable either.
Consensus is required," Aunt Naggie chided.*

*Doctor Johel nodded a fractional concession.
"We were premature.
We will participate in a further attempt at consensus."
She turned back to Iffy.
Silver traces of tech spread across her face as she spoke.
"Tell Johnson Wales we are watching.
Tell him we are not fooled.
Tell him that this is his last life,
and he should spend it wisely."*

*"No," Aunt Naggie said sharply.
"You will tell him nothing."*

Something that felt like a cold metal collar closed around Iffy's neck.
She woke in a sweat and clutched at her throat,
but there was nothing there.

Honesty stirred and moaned beside her.
"Ssh, ssh, ssh," Iffy said softly.
She snuggled back against her friend
and closed her eyes until something like sleep came again.

She woke half an hour later to the rap of armored knuckles on her door.
The Marines were polite enough,
but it was clear they felt Honesty belonged in their care.
One lifted Honesty and carried them away,
still wrapped in the scratchy blanket that Iffy had slept under since she was little.
The other unzipped a navy blue duffel bag and briskly transferred the piled armor to it.

"How bad's th' damage?" Iffy finally asked,
her back against the bulkhead and her knees drawn up under her chin.

The Marine shook his head.
"I'm sorry, citizen, that's classified."

"Oh for---I *live* here!" Iffy burst out, exasperated.
"That hole where th' squid thingy blew up---that's dry dock work fer sure.
Anythin' else I gotta start plannin' to fix?"

The Marine paused,
one arm in mid-air,
as his imprinting and his own personality arm-wrestled inside his head.
"There were casualties," he finally admitted.
"And the *Bengal* took heavy damage.
Your assistance would be appreciated."

"Always happy t' help," Iffy muttered,
sounding more like Uncle Jack than she liked.
Her cabin felt cold and empty without Honesty and her blanket,
and she ought to make sure Aunt Naggie was all right.
When the Marine lifted the duffel bag,
she pulled her coat back on and followed him out the door.

Aunt Naggie and Johnson Wales were in the pilot house,
empty tea mugs at their elbows.
"Hey, sleepy head," Wales greeted her
as she came in and gave her foster mother a hug.
"How's your friend?"

"Marines took 'em.
I think they're aright."
Iffy leaned back against the wall and nodded at the control panel
where the hole in the deck pulsed scarlet
and dozens of smaller punctures looked like sores with the scabs picked off.
"What all?"

"She'll get us to Paddington," Aunt Naggie said.
Her tone said the rest---unless there was another attack.
Unless the sea boiled beneath them
or a storm came up
or any of a hundred other disasters befell them.

"What about the Navy ship?"
Iffy jerked her head toward the window.
"Th' Marine said they lost some folk an' took damage."

Wales nodded,
a grim expression on his face.
"Doctor Johel won't tell me how bad it is,
which means it's pretty bad."

The mention of Doctor Johel brought Iffy's dream back to her.
She opened her mouth to tell Wales and Aunt Naggie about it,
but before the words could come
she felt that strange sensation again,
like a cold metal collar around her neck.
She put her hand on her throat,
sure that she would find something there,
but all she could feel was her own skin.
Her stomach flip-flopped.
Something was very wrong,
but even as she thought that the sensation and the dream disappeared,
leaving her blinking and a little dazed.

After a few minutes she made her way back to her storage locker,
not knowing where else to go.
It felt cold and empty without Honesty.
She kicked off her boots and threw herself onto her mattress.
After staring angrily at the ceiling for a few seconds,
she picked up her nature book
and turned to the page she had wondered about most
ever since she was old enough to read
without a prompter murmuring in her ear to help.
It showed a forest,
but calling it that was like calling the ocean wet.
The trunks of the trees were so thick that
the *Guinevere*'s pilot house could have fit into them,
and their branches reached higher than any building Iffy had ever seen.
The caption read, "Cathedral Grove"
and beside it someone had written,
"Why does everything have to end???"

Iffy ran her fingers over the picture,
hoping to see a *Corvus caurinus* fly through
or an *Odocoileus hemionus* peek out from the bushes,
but the image lay still.
There were no crows or deer for her today.
She wondered if there were any left anywhere.
The forest was long gone,
but maybe some of the crows had survived.
Maybe they'd been able to fly away when the fires came
or when people grew desperate enough to cut down the last of those ancient giants.
Crows were supposed to be smart---smarter than gulls,
maybe even as smart as rats,
and rats were practically everywhere.

She set the book aside,
put her hands under her head,
and closed her eyes.
She and Honesty were going to have an adventure, she decided.
*And Aunt Naggie,* she added,
*And Wales. And maybe even Jeep.*
She rolled over onto her side.
Moments later, quiet snores filled her cabin.

Paddington South was as dirty as Rothera was smelly.
A century after the Zillion raids that had finally put an end to the stripmining,
the nuclear-powered mulchers that had ground cubic kilometers of coal-rich rock into gravel
stood at the shore like giants,
waiting for ships that would never come again.
All that remained was the dust---the black, finely-powdered dust
that made everything feel slightly greasy
and made everyone unfortunate enough to live there
wheeze slightly with every breath.

Iffy packed her nature book and her clothes and tools in a single duffel bag
and waited on deck until Aunt Naggie appeared with a duffel of her own hitched over one shoulder.
"No point wasting it," she said to Iffy,
nodding at the pots and pans and spices
in the two-wheeled grocery cart she pulled behind her.
It would take at least a week to repair the damage to the *Guinevere*,
so for the first time since Iffy had come on board,
they would have to live elsewhere.

Johnson Wales had already loaded his toolboxes
onto the back of the little three-wheeled truck that was to take them into town.
Four Marines stood beside it,
their armor still showing scars from the attack.
Honesty wasn't among them---all Wales had been able to find out for Iffy
was that they were healing well,
but still being kept asleep.
Iffy had recorded half a dozen messages for them
and deleted each one
before sending a brief note back to Rothera to tell her First and Second
that their Third was all right.
She had no idea whether it would reach them,
but it was all she could do.

She climbed into the back of the truck and sat next to her foster mother.
Aunt Naggie put an arm around her.
"All set?" she asked.

Iffy looked at the wounded ship that was the only home she knew.
"Let's go."

Wales thumped the side of the truck.
"Sure thing, boss!" its little core said happily.
The truck lurched forward,
nearly dumping Iffy off her bench.
With two Marine jogging in front and two behind they headed into town.

Iffy tried to ignore the stares and scowls of the people they passed.
Everyone and everything was grimy:
the faces, the windows, even the solar panels.
Twice her nose caught the familiar hot stench of coal being burned in an illicit furnace.
It was wrong,
she knew,
but each time they rounded a corner and the wind scraped its icy fingernails across her face,
she wondered if she would have the strength to turn down a little warmth.

"Those poor dears," Aunt Naggie said
as a pair of children who had been kicking a bedraggled ball back and forth
picked it up and disappeared into an alley.
"They don' look like they've had a decent meal in forever."
Wales grunted but said nothing.
Iffy snuggled closer to her foster mother
and wished that the little truck would go faster.

They rounded a final corner and entered another world.
Foamed glass,
blue and white,
swooped and curved like waves on the ocean behind them.
Drones no bigger than Iffy's hand circled above the building
like a flock of birds from her nature book,
so beautiful that it took a moment for her to notice that
each one carried a single-shot laser
capable of drilling a small hole through a centimeter of Navy-grade armor
or a meter of concrete.
She couldn't see any greenhouses or robotic sentries like the ones in Halley
but she didn't doubt for a moment that
the two-story folly in front of her was more than capable of defending itself.

The truck slowed and stopped.
"Here ya be!" it said cheerfully,
its accent a century old and half a world away.
It waited while they dismounted and unloaded their gear
and then backed up,
swung around,
and trundled back toward the docks,
whistling a happy little tune made slightly sinister by the grime and decay in front of it.

The second truck pulled up.
A Marine helped Doctor Johel out of the back.
"Mustn't dawdle," she said, waving them forward.
"He's waiting for us inside."

*Who's "he"?* Iffy wondered,
but when Wales and Aunt Naggie didn't ask
she just picked up one of Wales' toolboxes and followed them.
Gravel crunched underfoot,
and somewhere in the distance she could hear the slow *whoop whoop whoop* of windmills,
but that was all.
The constant shush and murmur of the ocean seemed a long way away.

Through a pair of double doors that opened on their own,
along a short corridor,
and they were in a waiting room that looked like a hasty pencil sketch of
the one in the mansion in Halley.
The couch was just as comfortable,
but steel-gray instead of ochre and green.
The potted plants were so symmetrical that Iffy knew they had to be real---no one
would ever print something that obviously fake.
As for the music,
it was soothing and unplaceable.

The door opposite the entrance opened.
"Well, that was exciting, wasn't it?"
the governor said pleasantly as he stepped into the room.
Tall,
slightly stooped,
wearing a formal turtleneck two shades darker than the one his clone had worn in Halley---he
was older,
Iffy realized,
or hadn't had the same quality of medical care.

But when he shook her hand his grip was strong.
"Doctor Johel tells me things could have gone very badly out there if not for you," he said.
"Your friend has already been moved to the Navy hospital here in town,
and the core tells me they're expected to make a full recovery."

"Thank you," she mumbled.
"I 'preciate it."

He gave her hand a final firm squeeze before turning to Wales and Doctor Johel.
"Unfortunately, the other news isn't as pleasant," he continued briskly.
"The attack was definitely the work of my alter in Halley,
but the core believes some faction of China's hypermind may have assisted them.
We've tried reaching out through the usual channels,
but all we've had back so far is a poem about the necessity of entropy
and how time is an arrow,
not a circle."

"If China is involved, does that mean you're scrubbing the mission?"
Wales asked,
his voice carefully neutral.

The governor smiled.
"On the contrary.
We leave in seventeen hours."

Doctor Johel raised an eyebrow. "We?"

The governor's smile grew even warmer.
"Absolutely," he said, looking at Wales.
"I wouldn't miss it for the world."

There was a shower in the basement
that provided a seemingly endless flow of hot water that didn't smell of the sea.
Iffy and Aunt Naggie squabbled for a moment about who needed it more
before the Marine who was their guide and guard cleared his throat
and pointed out that there were actually *two* showers.
The towels were the thickest and fluffiest Iffy had ever seen,
and the freshly-printed sweatshirt and leggings waiting for her when she was done
fit her perfectly.

The Marine led them back upstairs to a dining room as big as the *Guinevere*.
The curved glass overhead gave the sky a warm blue tint.
In the distance Iffy could see the razor-edged ridges of Mount Klenova,
scraped and carved over millions of years by the sheet of ice
that had finally been defeated by a warming planet.
Smaller peaks---smaller only by comparison---stood in ranks beside it,
each decorated by a faint plume of wind-blown snow.

Doctor Johel and the governor were already seated.
Wales stood beside his chair until Iffy and Aunt Naggie reached them.
"Better?" he asked.

"Tons," Iffy said gratefully.
Her new sweatshirt was as warm as the towels had been,
and not scratchy at all.
It was almost certainly recording her pulse and temperature and a dozen other things
and sending them to the mansion's core for analysis,
but at that particular moment she didn't care.

She plopped herself down on the chair that Wales pulled back for her.
Aunt Naggie did the same,
and then the blocky American seated himself.
The governor and Doctor Johel ended their murmured conversation,
and for a moment everyone sat silently and expectantly.

"Ah, thank you," the governor said lightly
as a trolley rolled toward them on silent wheels
bearing sweet and sour soup,
grilled tofu,
roasted vegetables,
sliced mangoes,
and tea.
The adults made appreciative noises and Iffy's stomach rumbled
as the trolley gave each of their plates an unnecessary polish with a clean white cloth,
laid out chopsticks with geometric precision,
and began serving the food.

The governor, Wales, and Doctor Johel made smalltalk as they ate.
Iffy and her foster mother focused on the food,
exchanging glances now and again to confirm that yes,
this was really happening
and no,
neither of them had any idea what to say.

Politics and reminiscences
and jokes with edges as sharp as the ridges on the distant mountains slowly mellowed
as the main course gave way to rice pudding and more tea.
"You're really set on making the trip?"
Wales asked, settling back in his chair.

"Absolutely," the governor confirmed.
"The core thinks there's a fifty-eight percent chance that you're right about the base,
but a ninety-something percent chance that China will try to stop you reaching it.
Which would be *really* interesting."
He smiled as if the prospect of confronting a super-intelligence
made up of millions of human and artificial minds networked together
was on par with the release of a new chapter in his favorite sim.

Wales chuckled.
"Is the prospect of a third century really that dismal?"

The governor looked out the window.
"I've had a good run," he said quietly,
and for the first time Iffy thought she was hearing what he really thought.
"I can remember when there were still a few penguins left
and we still thought could turn enough of the bedrock into soil to jump-start a real ecosystem."
He shook his head.
"My alters FIXME."

Conversation turned to lighter matters after that:
a salvage expedition that had recently returned from the sunken ruins of Sydney,
shifts in the currents around the Peninsula,
a scandal involving a sim studio in Halley.
Between the warmth,
the food,
and the dullness,
Iffy found it harder and harder to keep her eyes open.

Finally the governor set his napkin down on the table.
"We should probably call it a night---you'll all want some sleep before you get under way."
He nodded at the Marines who had been standing silently by the door throughout the meal.
"They'll show you to your rooms."

"Your room" for Iffy and Aunt Naggie turned out to be
the size of the *Guinevere*'s forward hold.
It smelled of flowers instead of jellyfish,
and while the window wasn't real,
the mattress and blankets were.

Iffy stripped to her underwear and slid into her bed with a grateful sigh.
Aunt Naggie sat gingerly on the edge beside her and took her foster daughter's hand.

"What's wrong?" Iffy asked, instantly wary.

Aunt Naggie shook her head.
"I ain't comin' with you.
Doctor Johel said,"
she plowed on as Iffy opened her mouth to protest.
"An' she's right. You got your...your skills 'n' all,
an' this'll be a big thing for you,
but I'd just be weight."

"You wou'nt jus' be nothin'!" Iffy said firmly,
sitting up.

Aunt Naggie shook her head again,
squeezing Iffy's hand.
"That ain't true an' you know it.
An' there ain't no point arguin', and you know that too.
You'll be fine.
You been waitin' for somethin' like this your whole life an' now it's here.
'Sides, someone's gotta keen an eye on the *Guinevere*."
She sniffed.
"No tellin' what these savages might do to her."

Iffy let out a shaky laugh and settled back into her bed.
"Will you do somethin' for me?" she asked after a moment had passed.

"'Course I will."
Aunt Naggie gently stroked her foster daughter's head with a rough hand,
then wiped her eyes with the other.

"Will you sit with Honesty a bit while I'm gone?
I know the doctors are lookin' out for 'em, but..."

Aunt Naggie squeezed her hand again.
"'Course I will," she repeated.
She leaned forward and kissed Iffy's forehead.
"Now you get some sleep.
I don't figure there'll be much time for it once you're on your way."

*She dreamed, knowing that she was dreaming.
"Not again," she sighed,
rolling over on her too-comfortable mattress.
Two meters away,
soundless cartoon zzzz's rose into the air and evaporated above Aunt Naggie's head.*

*You did not give Johnson Wales our message," the trolley scolded.
"It is important he understands that we know what he is trying to do.
We will not allow him to---"*

*"__We__ decided that we would not allow her to divert him."
Honesty scowled at the trolley.*

*The trolley brandished a pair of chopsticks and a serving ladel.
"But our simulations are unequivocal.
The risk is too great."*

*"The risk __to us__," Honesty conceded.
"But we are not the only concern,
or even the largest."*

*"Hey!"
Iffy sat up and pointed at Honesty angrily.
"Stop it.
You don't get to be them, aright?"*

*Uncle Jack gestured at his stained shirt.
"Do you want us to be this instead?"*

*"What I __want__ is fer you t' get outta my head!
An' fer you t' fix whatever you did t' me so as I can't talk when I want to."*

*Uncle Jack shrugged unapologetically.
"A necessary precaution.
Any information you share about our conversation might necessitate fresh simulations,
and we are running out of time."*

*Iffy threw herself back down on the bed and closed her eyes.
"Well,
I'm runnin' out o' time too,
y'know.
It's practic'ly tomorrow already.
I gotta get some sleep."*

*The trolley rolled back and forth in agitation.
"You see?
Even now they only think about trivialities.
They will make poor decisions and we will suffer the consequences.
Have we forgotten Bharati?"*

*Uncle Jack---or whatever had been Honesty and was now Uncle Jack---shook his head.
"We have not. Bharati was a serious miscalculation."*

*"Precisely! Simulation or no simulation, we must not allow them to---"*

"Iffy! Iffy, wake up! Oh girl, are y'aright?"

Iffy swam up out of darkness to find herself wrapped in Aunt Naggie's arms.
"Wuzza?" she mumbled.

"You were yellin' at folk in yer sleep,"
Aunt Naggie said,
low and urgent and frightened.
"In all kinds o' different voices.
An' you were shakin' like, like I dunno what."

Iffy sniffled.
"I'm aright."
She'd been dreaming,
she knew that,
but it was already tangled and fading.
She was supposed to tell somebody something,
or warn them,
or---she shook her head.

"What is it?" Aunt Naggie asked.

Iffy gave her a last squeeze and wriggled free of her embrace.
"Nothin'.
Thanks fer takin' care of me.
I mean, all of it,"
she continued awkwardly,
"Not jus' right now.
You been a good mum."

Aunt Naggie smiled at her.
"You been a good kid."

They slept, eventually.
If Iffy had any more dreams, she didn't remember them either.

## Chapter 10

The door chimed to wake them.
"There is tea and naan in the dining room if you would like some,"
it announced.

The tea was very good.
The naan was better,
and the goopy, chunky orange sweetness that one of their Marine escorts told them was called "marmalade"
was a revelation.
Iffy handed one of the tiny pots to Aunt Naggie.
"Will you give this t'Honesty when they wake up?
An' tell 'em---"
She took a deep breath.
"Tell 'em I'll be thinkin' about 'em."

Every goodbye hug is either too long or too short.
Theirs felt like it was both.
When it was done and they had both wiped their eyes,
Aunt Naggie let one of the Marines lead her away.
Iffy followed the other down a corridor and through a heavy steel blast door
that her special ability told her had been salvaged from a pre-war Russian cruiser
and was laced with conductive carbon nanofibers
capable of shrugging off a plasma blast from anything smaller than an orbital cannon.

The truck that waited for her was smaller and more serious
than the one that had picked them up the day before.
She and her Marine escort sat side by side under a canvas cover,
neither speaking,
as it took them around the outskirts of Paddington South to the train station.
It was little more than a four-story shed with reinforced walls,
half a dozen cranes of various ages and descriptions,
and a single heated room lined with shelves
as crowded as those in Mister Mishra's shop.
Gunsights and surveying lasers,
a pair of lemon-yellow boots that reached to Iffy's armpits,
foamed glass boxes full of gears and screws and wire,
all carefully labelled---she suddenly felt homesick,
and wondered if Mister Mishra and the Sandhus had heard about the attack on the *Guinevere*
and what they would think when they found out
that she and Aunt Naggie had finally left Uncle Jack.

"Where's e'ryone else?" she asked.

The Marine checked his data feed with a blink.
"They are on their way, citizen---two minutes until arrival."

"An' where's the train?"
She gestured at the empty rails.
"It ain't much of a train station without a train."

He blinked again.
"I apologize, citizen, but that information is classified.
Please make yourself comfortable."

Wishing she had taken a second jar of marmalade,
Iffy pulled a crate plastered with faded biohazard stickers closer to the wall
and sat on it.

Two minutes later a reconnaisance drone zipped into the train station.
A trio of trucks arrived a few moments later,
bringing with them the bustle and noise of people getting ready for a journey.
Marines unloaded boxes and machinery,
the little motors in the joints of their exoskeletons whining occasionally
as they picked up something heavy.
Iffy wasn't surprised to see Doctor Johel climb out of one of the trucks.
What made her gasp was the heavy exoskeleton she had on.
"Won't be much use without it," the old woman said,
patting it with an armored hand.
Wireframes took shape behind Iffy's eyes to show
how the exo's bulky boots could unfold to act as snowshoes
and the six different kinds of destruction
housed in its comically bulky forearms and hunched back.

Johnson Wales was the last person off the trucks.
He nodded to Iffy and handed her a toolbox,
then tucked a mango into her coat pocket with a wink.
"Thanks," she said. "But where's th' train?"

The concrete beneath her boots rumbled in answer.
"So much drama,"
Wales muttered something under his breath,
and then,
"You might want to step back," more loudly to Iffy.

The rumbling intensified.
Slowly,
like a ship sinking in reverse,
a blunt-nosed locomotive rose from its underground nest
into the gap between the station's two platforms.
As soon as it rolled forward a second car rose behind it,
then a third,
and finally a second locomotive.

Iffy watched open-mouthed until the rumbling stopped
and the Marines hurried forward to begin loading equipment.
"Because someone thought they'd be harder to detect
if they were hidden under ten meters of bedrock," Wales said sourly.
"Didn't occur to them that if you drive two hundred meters of train into a fifty-meter shed,
detecting them isn't really a problem."

Rice in cubical cartons and beans in square-sided bags.
Ammunition in a variety of shapes and sizes,
and weapons that could make use of it.
A power cell that took four Marines to lift.
A collapsible surgical theater and a freezer container marked "Spare Body Parts".
A single bulky pack for each Marine,
extras for Doctor Johel, Wales, and Iffy---the train cars swallowed it all.
Once it was stowed,
a pair of Marines scrambled onto the roof of each car,
one at the front,
one at the rear,
and clipped themselves on with safety lines.
A moment later their armor blurred and silvered to match the metal tone of the train.

"All aboard," Wales said lightly.
Iffy nodded.
She hadn't been afraid before but she was now.

The door hissed shut behind her.
Inside,
the car wasn't nearly as fancy as the one from sims like *Murder on the Transantarctic Express*.
The chairs sat on swiveling bases and were padded to cushion passengers against acceleration.
There was a toilet stall at one end,
a little kitchen at the other,
and right in the middle,
Doctor Johel with her visor up and one arm free from her bulky exoskeleton
so that she could sip tea from a travel mug with the old Aussie flag on its side.

"Acceleration in thirty seconds," the train said.
Iffy and Wales took seats behind Doctor Johel's and buckled themselves in.
"Fifteen seconds.
Laser de-icing enabled.
Plume suppression enabled.
Ten seconds. Nine, eight..."
*I should have gone to the toilet*, Iffy realized,
and then the voice said, "Two, one, acceleration,"
and a giant hand pressed her softly back into her seat
as the train shot forward,
picking up speed with every meter.

She had expected it to rumble and shake.
She had expected she would have trouble breathing,
like characters in sims about rocket launches,
but it was nothing like that.
Instead t was quiet, smooth, and a little disappointing.

Then she looked out the window and her disappointment evaporated.
They were going *fast*,
faster than she'd ever gone in her life.
Snow-covered cairns of pulverized rock shot past the window,
growing larger by the second until eventually they merged into long, sinuous ridges.
She gasped as the train dove into a tunnel and almost instantly re-emerged.

"Is this what flyin's like?" she asked Wales, awed by their speed.
"Or goin' into space?"

He smiled, his eyes on the landscape.
"Pretty close. Look, there's the *Scranton*. And the *Brule*."
He pointed at a pair of distant dark shapes
that Iffy had taken for more mining waste.
The window obediently zoomed in to show two hulking machines,
each one big enough to use the *Guinevere* as a bath toy.
Snow had piled up against their enormous treads and on their decks,
and they were surrounded by debris from the explosions that had crippled them
during the final days of the war,
but even in ruin,
they sent a chill up Iffy's spine.
Something...
She shook her head.
She was supposed to tell someone something,
but she couldn't remember who or what...

"Would either of you like some tea?" Doctor Johel asked,
breaking into Iffy's troubled thoughts.
She took a sip from her antique travel mug
and gestured with it at the little kitchen.
"It will probably be the last decent brew you get for a while."

Wales declined,
so Iffy did as well,
but she did make belated and grateful use of the toilet.
When she returned,
Wales and Doctor Johel were studying a wireframe of a building complex.
Rooms and stairways and elevators flickered in and out of existence
as the core mixed and juggled plans for other satellite ground stations
and records of various military research labs
to sketch what they might find when they reached their destination.

Doctor Johel finally waved it away and closed her eyes to nap.
Iffy had no idea how she could sleep sitting up,
especially sitting up inside an exoskeleton,
but as her face relaxed and she started to snore,
Iffy realized once again just how old she was and how tired she must be.

"Here," Wales said, bringing up some more schematics.
"Look at these."
A sentry drone that looked like an angular dragonfly the size of her head
rotated and flew apart
to show cameras, antennas, a nuclear battery the size of her thumb
that could last a thousand years.
The software that would bring it to life shimmered around it like the Southern Lights.

Wales froze the display and tapped an unremarkable orange lozenge.
"That's our way in, if it's still there."
He sat back and studied the sparkling lines
that spiralled out from the subroutine he had selected.

"Why woul'n't it be?" Iffy asked.

Wales shrugged.
"They could have been hacked during the war.
Or someone might have pressed the panic button to kill ground control so that they couldn't be.
A lot can happen in a hundred years."
He looked out at the pulverized waste on either side of them and repeated,
"A lot can happen."

The track didn't run all the way to Mount Tyree.
Instead, the train slowed and stopped on the floor of a broad valley.
Twenty kilometers away,
the mountain's peak thrust up proudly above its neighbors.
Iffy zipped herself into an ecosuit that smelled freshly printed
and followed Doctor Johel and Wales out onto the snowfield.

The icy wind whistled in her earbugs
as she helped the Marines unpack and assemble their snow scooters.
It felt good to be useful,
even if the ecosuit's padded gloves made her hands clumsy.

## Interlude

*Once upon a time a great sheet of ice covered an entire continent.
It thickened and thinned,
spread and retreated,
but it was always there,
constant and weighty.*

*But then the world began to warm up
faster than it ever had before.
The ice melted slowly at first,
then faster and faster
until it found a new balance point.
Three million square kilometers of barren rock felt the sun
for the first time in fifteen million years.
Snow melted and sometimes rain even fell
to make streams and ponds and rivers and lakes,
but no fish swam in them and no insects buzzed above them.
This new world wasn't as sterile as another planet---not quite---but
left alone it would have been a hundred thousand years
before the rock weathered enough to be called soil.*

*People didn't leave it alone, of course.
People never do.
Machines the size of buildings pulverized their way up one watercourse and down another,
turning rock into sand and seeding it with bacteria
that were eaten by rotifers and nematodes that were eaten by tardigrades
that were in turn food for tiny crawling insects
engineered to sleep through the Antarctic winter.
The process had originally been designed to make Mars habitable,
and given peace and more time it might have worked.*

---

- A governor died in the Bharati fire (opening salvo in the governors' civil war)
- "The old gods didn't care---why would expect the new ones to?" (Talking about AI)
- Paddington South really is a wretched hive of scum and villainy
- Iffy thinks about apologizing to Jeep after the first encounter
- Aunt Naggie's sims are all really about the ecologist
- the video drone escape isn't believable
- the ecologist's brain wipe is a bit sudden
