*Suppose the world is ending
and you want to build a secret research facility—a place
completely cut off from what's left of the world's governments
and their artificial minions
so that you can create or study things you shouldn't
without being interrupted.
You might think that the first step was to choose a location,
but it's not.
The actual first step is to pick a cover story
that gives you a plausible reason to imprint prisoners and indentured laborers
with the skills you need
and then erase their memories afterward.
(In theory you will only erase their memories of where they were and what they did.
In practice the process is sometimes imprecise,
particularly if you want to err on the side of caution,
but if you're the sort of person who needs a secret research facility,
you're probably also the sort who believes that
nothing worth having comes without some kind of price.)*

*If your cover story is something to do with reforesting ravaged rainforests
you will probably build your base in Africa or Indonesia.
You might consider Brazil,
but even before the war with the machines
it has become a complicated place as nationalism,
macumba,
and apocalyptic ecology hybridize in ever-more-strident ways.
If your cover story is related to climate engineering,
on the other hand,
no one will raise an eyebrow if your site is somewhere formerly arctic.
The Melt hit the poles first and hardest,
and most of those mad enough to believe that the damage can be undone
by scattering megatons of absorbent catalysts over thousands of square kilometers
naturally congregate there.*

*The poles are exactly the wrong place to go
if you want people to believe that you plan to launch something into orbit,
but in a way that works in your favor.
Everyone expects you to lie about what you're actually doing,
so telling part of the truth is a good way to hide the part left unsaid.
A ground station for a network of microsatellites
flung into orbit by an automated factory located somewhere on the far side of the Moon?
You are so obviously courting condemnation for adding to the already catastrophic volume of space junk
that no one will suspect that's what your base is actually for.
Or rather,
everyone (and everything) will suspect it,
but only as one of a thousand low-probability possibitilies.*

*To finish throwing them off the scent,
you can build a dozen safe havens in a circle around your base.
To keep the workers safe,
your public relations bot explains to anyone who cares to pay attention.
Antarctica's storms have been growing in frequency and severity for decades,
and it will only be a matter of time before tornadoes appear.
You may not be able to guarantee that your laborers will return with their memories intact,
but you will of course do your utmost to ensure that they do return.
Deeply dug and well provisioned,
your bunkers will allow them to wait out the worst the southern continent can throw at them in comfort.*

*Assuming, that is, that nothing goes wrong…*
