<section markdown="1">

She pulled off her glove,
scraped some dried blood out of her nostril,
and stuck her finger in one of the drill holes.
The rock thought for a second and then opened with a faint click
to reveal a space the size of the toilet stall on the *Guinevere*.
A wraparound shelf held tools,
a rifle connected to a flimsy jumpsuit,
and a medical kit.
The center of the floor was taken up by a circular hatch.

She grinned at Edson.
"Welcome to my secret lair."

Whatever he might have said in reply was cut off by a low rumble.
She whirled around and froze as a white-furred head lifted off the snow three strides away.
"*Mãe do mundo*," Edson breathed
as the polar bear rosed to its feet.
For a heart-stopping moment Iffy *knew* that this was where and how her story would end,
but then she saw the familiar silver sheen of tech beneath the bear's fur.

*«danger / nearing / haste»*

"It says trouble's comin'," Iffy relayed.

"No kidding," Edson muttered.
"Don't suppose it's offerin' to help with that?"

As if on cue a second bear and then a third ambled around the outcropping.
One of them stopped next to the first.
The other took a tentative step forward,
only to hesitate and withdraw when the first bear growled at it.
It wasn't tweaked like the other two,
Iffy realized.
It was just several hundred kilograms of predator
looking at something edible and defenseless.

*«haste»*

Iffy jerked her chin at the hatch.
"It wants us to get movin'."

"Aright."
Edson stepped into the small chamber,
bent down,
grabbed the handwheel,
and yelped,
snatching his hand back.

"What's wrong?"
Iffy asked as the Ecologist swore in four different languages.

"It shocked me,"
he said accusingly.

*«undesired»*
Ideas emerged in Iffy's mind,
bumping into each other like ice floes.
She shook her head to clear it.

"I think it wants me on my own,"
she told Edson.
Without waiting for his reply she bent over and grabbed the handwheel herself.
When nothing happened she pulled it,
gently at first and then harder.
Metal screeched as it turned.
Once, twice, three times—click.
She lifted the hatch.

"Secret lair, eh?"
Edson said,
looking over her shoulder at the laddered shaft descending into the mountain.

She shrugged.
"Think there's treasure down there?"

The Ecologist snorted.
"Nope."
He reached past her to take the rifle and wriggled into its attached jumpsuit,
then oophed as she hugged him.

"Don't do anythin' stupid,"
she said fiercely.

He snorted again.
"Don't *you*."
They squeezed each other once more,
and then he turned to the bears and said,
"Aright, let's get goin'."

Iffy watched the foursome head downhill,
wondering if it was just an accident that the two tweaked bears
kept themselves between their unmodified partner and Edson.
The Marines' infrared would spot them immediately,
but even as she had the thought,
schematics and false-color visualizations flashed through her head.
The tweaked bears' tech would dampen and modify their heat signatures
long enough for them to look like half a dozen arctic rabbits
fleeing from the unmodified bear,
while Edson's jumpsuit would—

She shook her head.
It didn't matter.
They would do what they could, and so would she.
With a deep breath,
she turned around and started her descent.

Iffy was halfway down the ladder when her nose told her something was wrong.
The smell wasn't rank like the week-dead seagull she had once found in a dumpster behind the Sandhus' store,
trapped when the lid closed as it scrounged for scraps.
Instead,
it was tired and a little bit sad.

She felt oddly detached
as she studied the mummified body lying a stride away from the bottom of the ladder.
Whoever he had been,
he'd had long dark hair and a beard.
His parka was silvered like hers,
but unlike hers,
had a bullet hole in the back surrounded by an old, dark stain.

She shook herself.
"Well," she said out loud.
"Let's see what we got."

The answer turned out to be weapons,
dried food that had either spoiled or mummified like the corpse,
several snowsuits with boots and breathing masks
(she puzzled over this for a bit),
and a small workshop stocked with tools and spare parts that made her hands itch.
She turned a laser cutter over in her hands,
then pulled a tarp off something that looked like
an oversized version of the sentry bots from the governor's mansion.
One of its side panels was folded back to reveal its motors and cables.
Another tarp revealed a second bot with the same bulky body and limbs
but a cluster of cameras and antennas where its head should have been.
The mod had clearly been made in haste:
the welds joining the additions to the bot's neck looked messy and unfinished,
and a handful of string-thin optical cables dangled from the opening.

Iffy looked around the room a second time.
Something didn't make sense.
How were the bots going get out?
They wouldn't have been able to climb the ladder.

She sat down and put her elbows on the workbench.
It hummed faintly and came to life.
A single icon appeared,
waiting patiently to be tapped.

She studied it for a moment.
It could a trap—malware designed to mesmerize anyone who looked it,
or any of a hundred other scenarios from sims,
but what choice did she have?

A faint scum of dust felt gritty under her finger as she swiped its top.
"User recognized," a soft voice said.
Iffy blinked in surprise as the icon folded in on itself.

"—a chance to hear this,
but if you do,
I'm sorry.
I'm so, so sorry."
The recorded voice was a man,
and sounded tired and frightened and brave all at once.
"We thought we could fix things,
but we've only made them worse."

The voice chuckled or choked back a sob—it was impossible to tell which.
"Suyin went back in this morning while the rest of us were asleep.
She thought she might be able to make it to the machine
if she cycled the shielding rapidly enough,
but I think she just wanted to be with Georgia."

"I tried to disable the guard robots,
but some of them are still loose in the auxiliary tunnels."
The voice paused for a heartbreaking moment.
I know we all agreed that the project needed a failsafe,
but I never thought we'd need it.
I never thought—oh shit."

Iffy jumped at the sharp *crack!*
There was the sound of something heavy hitting the floor.
A moment later metal clicked on concrete,
and then the recording ended with a soft, cheerful *ding*.

The screen filled with icons and images like those in Iffy's app.
Two dozen smiling, confident faces were arranged on the app
in eight rows of three.
The top row contained a man with long dark hair and a beard
and two women who looked like clones of each other.
"Doctor Arno Severin,"
she read aloud.
The names below other images identified Suyin and Georgia.
The others were all of a similar age,
all smiling,
and—

And there,
in the bottom row,
was Commander Johnson Wales,
another man named Surjinder Johel that Iffy guessed was Doctor Johel's grandfather,
and an older version of herself labeled Suhailah Kwan.

There were no other recordings,
at least not that Iffy could find,
but there were maps showing a network of maintenance tunnels
just big enough for raccoons or slinky bots,
some running for kilometers.
She would be able to fit her arm into one of them,
but no more.

There were other tunnels,
though,
big enough for people and heavy equipment.
Some were dense with red flags that showed collapse,
flooding,
or chronic instability.
She puzzled over that for a second before dismissing it.

It took her a few minutes to realize that
the web of tunnels wasn't centered on the Niobium base.
Instead,
its heart was a kilometer further south.
That wasn't what made Iffy chew her lips as she studied the accompanying schematics, though.
She could think of a hundred uses for a superconducting ring
large enough to sail the *Guinevere* through,
but why put a cage for lab rats at its center?
And if you had a yottahertz laser capable of vaporizing steel from orbit,
why would you point it directly at an identical laser,
and why would you leave just enough space between them for
one (1) adult with arctic-rated camping equipment
and a month's worth of high-energy rations?

She sat back,
stretched,
and yawned so widely that her jaw clicked.
As tired as she was,
she needed to get moving.
*Any suggestions?* she thought,
but her voices were still silent.

It took her ten minutes to get the two sentry bots online.
Their optical sensors didn't glow red—that only happened in sims—but
she still took an involuntary step back when their heads turned in unison toward her.

"Sit," she ordered.
One lowered itself to the concrete.
The other studied her
while its core tried to decide whether her voice patterns
matched those in its memory closely enough.

"I said *sit*," she repeated as firmly as she could.
The bot took a step toward her,
hesitated,
and crouched beside its twin.

Iffy didn't know if anyone had ever built a chariot to be pulled by two sentry robots,
but if so,
she was pretty sure they hadn't made it out of a heavy-duty dolly and fiber optic cables.
She nudged it skeptically with her boot.
The frictionless bearings in its wheels were undamaged,
so it would roll enough,
but even without the schematics in her head
she could see that it would want to slip, tip, or flip
at every bump and corner.

She lowered herself gingerly onto the dolly.
A plastic crate full of tools pressed against her side,
and another with spare parts for the bots nestled under her elbow.
"Yip yip!" she said,
snapping the cables she had rigged as reins.

The bots didn't move.
Iffy sighed.
"Forward one quarter speed," she ordered.
The dolly jerked beneath her as the bots set off at a trot into the tunnel.

She thumbed a handlight and pointed it ahead of them.
"Increase speed to one half."
The dolly's wheels made a sizzling sound as they rolled faster into the unknown.

After half an hour her back was aching and her backside had gone numb.
She was about to order the bots to stop when they pulled up short.
"Whoa!" she squawked as the dolly smacked hard into their hind legs.

The bots ignored her.
Their heads twitched this way and that in an almost birdlike way.
The one that had hesitated before accepting her orders took a step and stopped.
Without warning a panel on its back flipped open
and something stubby and lethal looking popped up.

She swore under her breath.
The gun on the bot's back spun around to point at her.
"Take it easy," she said,
her heart suddenly pounding.

Metal clicked on concrete somewhere in the darkness ahead of them.
The bot's gun spun around again.

Iffy closed her eyes and tried to slow her breathing.
Nothing:
no images flashed into her mind
and no thoughts suddenly emerged fully-formed.

Metal clicked on concrete again.
Her eyes snapped open.
The sound was *behind* her this time.

She turned her head slowly.
Light reflected off three—no, four—bots
like the pair that had been pulling the dolly.
One was missing part of a foreleg.
Another's side was deeply dented
as if something had tried to punch right through it,
and all four bore more scratches and scars than Iffy could count.

The lead bot took one more step and halted.
Struck by a sudden thought,
she reached into the crate of tools she had packed earlier.
An adjustable wrench,
a screw jack that might be able to outdent the bot's side—what she really needed
was Mister Mishra's shop and Johnson Wales' toolbox,
but these would have to do.

She turned around to face the bots and held the tools out.
"Aright?" she asked.

None of the bots moved.
For one panicked moment Iffy thought she had guessed wrong,
but then the bot took two more steps toward her
and lowered itself into a crouch.

The bots had been built to be scouts and guards and weapons.
The blunt claws on the ends of their legs could pick up a rock
or grab hold of someone's arm,
but were no good for delicate work.
Scratches and dents on the bot's inner frame showed
where they had tried to repair each other anyway.

Wire,
a crimping tool,
a screwdriver with a torsion readout built into its handle—there.
She patted the bot's back.
"Good as new."
Which was a lie,
but felt like the right thing to say.

The bot stood,
braced its legs,
and shivered through a rapid self-test.
When the reflex capacitor that Iffy had just wired into place didn't rattle
it made a soft, incongruous *ping*
and stepped aside to make room for another member of its pack.

Iffy put her tools back in the crate and stood.
"I'm sorry,"
she said.
"I gotta keep movin',
but if you wanna come with me
I'll fix you when we get somewhere safe."

The bots didn't move.
"I really gotta go,"
Iff said,
turning to pick up her crate.

A clawed foreleg closed around her arm.
"Hey!"
She smacked it with her hand.
"None o' that, aright?"

The bot released her but didn't back up.
She glanced at the two still in harness and frowned,
struck by another idea.
The bots didn't have collars,
but a lifetime at sea had taught Iffy dozens of ways to tie a knot.
She left plenty of slack so that the bots could pull their heads out if they needed to.

When she was done,
the three bots that had all of their legs waited patiently in a line behind the dolly,
the cable looped around their necks.

"Come on, you," she said to the bot that was missing part of its leg.
"Up you get."
She put her hand where its neck would have been and tugged it forward.
Limping,
it clambered up onto the dolly and crouched down.

"Nope, nope, not there."
She tugged it again,
then sighed when it didn't move.
"Aright,
stay there if you want to—I'll get a better view up front anyway."
A moment later she was rolling through the tunnel once again
with three of the new bots following single file behind her.

Iffy leaned back gingerly against the crippled bot.
It rotated its head to study her.
After a moment she draped an arm over its back to steady herself.
It wasn't actually more comfortable than just sitting upright,
but it was somehow more comforting.

Against all odds her eyes began to close.
She snapped out of her doze when the bots pulled up short.
"Shad!"
The dolly smacked hard into the hind legs of the ones in front.
Six boxy clusters of sensors and cameras swivelled
to point back the way they had come.
That's when Iffy heard the rhythmic *clunk clunk clunk* of exoskeletoned feet on concrete.

She unlooped the cables around the bots' necks.
"Listen,"
she said,
squatting in front of the one she had repaired
so that her head and its sensors were on the same level.
"I know I'm not who you were s'posed t' be guardin',
but those folk back there?
They're *really* not s'posed t' be here."
She fished the screwdriver out of her pocket and held it up.
"You fix that an' I promise,
I'll do my best t' fix you an' your friends."

She had no reason to believe the bot could understand her.
There was no telling what strange loops might have formed in its core
as it patrolled these abandoned tunnels.
For all she knew it would take one look at the Marines
and decide they were its true masters.

But the bot took a step forward and to butted her gently with its head,
then turned and disappeared into the darkness
with its two companions at its heels.

The crippled bot rose on its three good legs.
It didn't make a sound,
but Iffy imagined that if it could have whined it would have.
"They'll be aright,"
she told it as she took her seat on the dolly,
wishing she believed her own words.

The first explosion echoed through the tunnel a few minutes later.
"Full speed!"
she ordered the harnessed bots.
Gunfire chattered behind them—Iffy couldn't tell how far away—and then
the sound-shock of another explosion rolled past them.

"Get down!" she ordered
The three-legged bot had risen to its feet again,
its body swaying slightly as its algorithms steadied its misbalanced weight
atop the dolly.

"I said get—affin' heck!"
Iffy ducked
as the bot jumped over her.
The dolly slewed wildly,
skidded,
and straightened out.

The tunnel was climbing now in a long steady incline.
The first painted stripe on the wall flew past so quickly that
she wasn't sure she had seen it.
A second followed,
then a third with a six-digit number stenciled next to it,
and then the tunnel leveled out and automatic lights came on over her head,
turning everything the dark red she associated with night watches.

The bots slowed and stopped
as the dolly rolled into a dimly-lit space several times larger
than the bunker they had left.
A blast door slid closed behind her,
metal scraping on stone for the first time in a century.
She had arrived.

"Lights?" she said after a moment.
"*Acendé luz?*
*Lampo roshan kon?*"

The crippled bot made a high-pitched whining sound.
Iffy squinted as clinically-white strips in the walls and ceiling obediently lit up,
then sucked in her breath.
She had hoped they would find a workshop
and feared it would be a graveyard,
but this—she hadn't expected this.

A thick cylinder lay on its side surrounded by pipes and machinery.
A bulky mass made of meter-square bricks loomed in the background.
The three-armed logo painted on its side was redundant:
even before schematics took shape in her head
she recognized the reactor for what it was.

The crippled bot on the dolly surged to its feet.
The panel on its back flipped open.
A stubby needle gun popped up.
Its targeting laser drew a thin red line through the air
to a squat four-wheeled service bot
that had just rolled into view from somewhere further back in the chamber.

The service bot froze and made a warbling sound.
The three-legged bot tilted its head toward Iffy.
"Um, sure," she said helplessly.
The laser blinked off,
but the sentry bot stayed on its feet
as the service bot began to wipe down the cylinder
with a brush whose bristles had long since worn away.

Iffy hunched her shoulders inside her parka and shivered.
She was hungry and tired and needed a bathroom,
but most importantly,
she didn't know what she was supposed to *do*.
Open the cylinder?
Fix it,
or blow it up somehow?

"Or just find a way out an' forget about it?"
she asked the empty air.

The service bot pivoted on its wheels to face her.
"The way out is simple, Iffy,"
Wales' voice said.
"All you have to do is talk to the machines for me
and we'll all get a happy ending."

</section>

<section markdown="1">

## Chapter 12

Iffy reached into the tool crate and picked up a wrench.
"Iffy, please,"
Wales chided.
"That's not going to—"

"Target!"
Iffy snapped,
pointing the wrench at the service bot.
The gun on the back of the sentry bot beside barked twice.
The first shot punched a hole through the service bot.
The second caught it off-center and sent it spinning across the floor.

The tunnel at the other end of the bunker had a blast door
to match the one behind them.
Iffy closed her eyes and rooted around in her not-memories of this place.
There.
She traced a shape on a contact pad beside the door,
then gasped as it slid open to reveal a pair of Marines.

"Oh Iffy,"
Wales' voice said through a speaker on one of their exoskeletons.
"I really didn't want to have to do this."

Iffy felt rather than saw the three-legged bot move.
"No!" she shouted.
Its gun fired twice
but it was already falling as the Marines' auto-targeted shots brought it down.

She was falling too.
Something had knocked the breath out of her.
She was lying on the concrete and it *hurt*,
it hurt so much that she couldn't even cry out,
not yet,
because the shot had gone right through her
just above her hip
and when she tried to breathe it felt like someone was kneeling on her back
and squeezing all the air out of her.

She heard Wales bark an order.
"No, don't," she tried to say
as exoskeletoned arms picked her up,
but the words came out as a gasp
and now she could breathe again
and the hurt spread through her like milk poured into tea.

Her head lolled to the side as the Marine placed her on a nearby work table.
One of them put a patch on her arm to take the pain away
except it was more like taking her away from the pain.
She floated inside her own body as if it was a warm bath
while the Marine sliced open her parka with a very sharp knife
and squeezed cold pink goo into the hole der needle gun had made.
She supposed she was lucky it had been an armor-piercing round.
She didn't think the Marine would have enough goo to fill
the hole that the other kind would have made.

*«unanticipated / unforeseen»*

"Oh there you are."
She didn't know if she had said the words out loud or not.
*Don't suppose you could lend a hand?*

*«inspection»*

The machine thought was clouded and soft-edged instead of crystal clear.
Without warning she was suspended beside a schematic of herself,
alone in a pocket universe constructed solely for this temporary purpose.
The fractalized patches of cells scattered through her body glistened blue-white,
but there and there and there they were red,
red for danger,
red like the blood on the work table underneath her.
They would heal—the tweaks in her genes were quadruply redundant to make sure of that—but
healing would take time
and that was something she/they/the world didn't have enough of right now.

"Sh sh sh," the Marine said softly.
An armored hand brushed gently against her cheek.
Her last thought before all her thoughts went away was,
*Honesty?*

FIXME: wake up

"Oh no you don't.
No fairy tales."

"It's my story,
I'll tell it the way I want to."
He closed the lid of his toolbox and sat down on it,
patting a spot beside him.
Iffy just glared at him.

Wales shrugged and leaned forward to put his elbows on his knees.
"Once upon a time the world was falling apart.
Where there wasn't flood there was drought,
and both brought hunger and disease.
Forests were burning,
the oceans were rising,
species were disappearing every day,
and no matter what people did,
their models kept making the same dark predictions."

"The people responsible suffered less than most,
of course,
but they still suffered.
Some lost themselves in sims.
Others built walls to protect their little kingdoms,
and others still threw their wealth at impossible schemes like moving to other worlds.
As things got worse,
a few of us managed to convince some of them
that the only solution was to move to Hell."

"Upload themselves?"
Iffy scoffed.
"An' then what,
you take their money while they're all bein' torn apart by malware?"

Wales shook his head.
"No.
I mean,
I wouldn't have cried if that happened.
Trust me,
anyone that rich makes the governor look like a saint.
No,
the idea was that we would imprint ourselves on the entire global network
so that we could fix the things no one else could.
People had tried it before,
but…"
He shrugged.
"We thought we had a couple of new angles,
and we were desperate."

He stared past her at the horizon.
"So we did the whole mad scientist thing with a secret underground lair
and a double-secret lab underneath that
and locked the door behind us.
Nothing in, nothing out, just two dozen of the smartest human beings alive
and enough equipment to settle on Mars."
He chuckled and pointed at his chest.
"Did I ever tell you that's actually what I was supposed to do?
All my genetic tweaks and this stuff in my head—it's all left over
from some previous bunch of mad scientists and *their* plan for saving the world."

"So what happened?"
Iffy asked despite herself after a few moments of silence.

"We had a vote,"
Wales said bleakly.
"We weren't ready,
but honestly,
we didn't know if we ever would be,
and things were getting worse faster than anyone had predicted.
We argued for a couple of days
and finally decided to go for it and hope for the best.
Everyone listened to their favorite music one last time
or had one last cup of coffee
and made jokes about seeing each other in the next life,
and then we climbed into our capsules and closed our eyes.
The next thing I knew I was on the floor of Beta Station
and everyone else was dead.
Everyone except you."

Iffy stared at him.
"Me?"
she asked,
but somehow she already knew what he was going to say next.

"Mm hm."
He took a small app out of his pocket and swiped.
"Don't worry,
it's completely off the network.
Here."

He turned it around and held it out.
An older version of her own face looked back at her.
"Her name wasn't Ang Kwan,"
he said quietly.
"It was Jing-mei Yuen.
And while all of us were working on our project
she somehow found a way to work on one of her own.
She's the only other person from the team who survived.
Your First was a tweaked clone of her,
and I think she's the reason the machines woke up."

She burst out laughing.
After a moment Wales began to chuckle too.
"Well, it's not quite the reaction I was expecting,"
he started.

"You—you—"
Iffy hiccupped.
"You're skew.
D'you seriously 'spect me t' b'lieve that?"
She lowered her voice.
"Oh, Iffy, you're th' chosen one.
Only you can save th' world."

"Your First said pretty much the same thing before she shot me,"
Wales observed drily,
tapping his chest with one finger.
"It took me twenty years to track her down.
I don't know how she got to Cape Town or what happened to Jing-mei.
All I know is that she had the same talent you do.
Somehow she could—"
He took a deep breath.
"Somehow *you* can talk to them and get them to talk back.
Not just trade deals and warnings about no-go zones but actual conversations."

"So that makes th' machine wars my fault?"
Iffy shot back angrily.

Wales cocked his head.
"How old were you when you started seeing things?
Eight?
Nine?
If your First got her abilities at the same age,
that would be almost exactly the time the machines woke up.
It's quite a coincidence."

"And there's another thing,"
he continued as she opened her mouth to protest.
"I'm good with tech—really good by most people's standards—and
the people and cores working for the governors are at least as good.
We should have been able to track you and your elders down in minutes,
but somehow you all managed to stay hidden."

He looked up at the sky as if he could see the machines' satellites orbiting overhead.
For all Iffy knew, he actually could.
"Someone up there likes you, Iffy.
Someone or something has been looking out for you your whole life."

A lifetime of hurt and anger boiled up inside Iffy.
"Go t' hell,"
she spat.
"Wasn't anyone lookin' out for th' *Rushin Doll* when she went under
an' everyone drowned.
Wasn't anyone lookin' out for me 'cept Aunt Naggie when we were in dock
an' th' other kids knocked me around 'cuz I was bad luck.
What I got,
I got 'cuz o' *me*,
not some— some—"
She wiped her sleeve angrily across her face.

"I'm sorry,"
Wales said for the third time.
"I wish I'd been there."

For a minute the only sound was the wind and the distant *skee-rawk* of a lonely gull.
"Why'd she shoot you?"
Iffy finally asked.

Wales shrugged.
"I didn't give her a chance to get to know me
before I dumped the whole save-the-world thing on her shoulders.
And when she said no,
I tried to make her do it anyway.
That was a mistake."

Something clicked in Iffy's head.
"So bumpin' into me at th' Sandhu's…"

"Wasn't exactly by chance, no.
But the drugs you've been getting?
Those are straight from the machines.
I stole a few grains once when you were younger, and—"
He shrugged again.
"Like I said, I'm pretty good with tech,
but I have no idea what it does or how the tweaks inside you work.
All I know is that I'm a hundred and forty-one years old
and I'm tired of making things worse."

He patted the toolbox.
"I brought everything you asked for.
What happens now is up to you.
If you want my help, it's yours.
If you want me to walk away and let you do this yourself,
I'll do that instead.
People like me and the governors,
we've had our chance.
It's your turn now."
