The first time Iñacio said he was going to teach her how to fight,
she thought he meant in a sim.
He grinned at that,
briefly boyish,
then handed her some bandages to wrap around her hands.
He pulled his punches so much that she barely felt them,
but the frustration of never being able to land any of her own
stung more each time he dodged one of her clumsy blows.

"I think you're gettin' the hang of it,"
he said after their first hour.

"Doesn't feel like it,"
she grumbled,
annoyed at the petulance in her voice.
"An' anyway,
I don't see how it's gonna be much use against Marines 'n' machines 'n' whatnot."

Iñacio tossed his hand wraps into the wicker bin they used for laundry.
"Not everyone wears an exo,"
he said.
"An' once you got th' hang o' this,
I'll teach you a couple o' things about bots."

Seven days after they climbed down into the shelter,
Iñacio declared it was safe to open the hatch.
"Just for a bit,"
he cautioned.
"We'll get some air an' then pack up an' head out tomorrow."

The air in question turned out to be colder than Iffy expected.
Summer was coming to an end—the sun was noticeably closer to the horizon,
and she was glad for the gloves built into her jacket.
Aunt Naggie would be—she stopped and took a deep breath.
Aunt Naggie would be cleaning what she could,
getting the *Guinevere* ready to overwinter in Halley's harbor.
The two Mrs. Sandhus would be laying in stocks of pickles and preserves
and storing rectangular bags of rice and noodles
in airtight plastic bins beneath the floorboards of their store.
She hoped Jeep was helping his father,
and Honesty…

"What needs packing?"
she asked Iñacio,
tossing the last of the pebbles she had gathered into the stream.

They left the next morning after a double breakfast and one last shower each.
Iffy had a pack of her own this time,
which she firmly told herself she *wasn't* proud of.

The herd was waiting for them when they climbed out of the shelter's concealed entrance.

</section>

<section markdown="1">

## Chapter 10

She woke in a bed—an actual bed with sheets,
not a cot or a bunk or her sleeping bag.
Gray light came through a small window set high in the wall.
It was probably too small for her to get through anyway,
she thought dully.
She frowned.
Why would she need to—oh.

She sat up and winced.
Someone had replaced her clothes with gray cotton shorts
and a matching tank top.
The bandage stuck to her stomach,
on the other hand,
was a bright, shiny blue.
She slid her hand gingerly around to her back
and felt a matching square there.

A pair of slippers waited patiently on the floor.
She turned,
wincing again,
and slid her feet into them.
Could she stand?
Yes.
She wasn't even light-headed,
though she was as thirsty as she'd ever been.
And she didn't need a bathroom nearly as much as she had
before she'd been shot,
which made her wonder about exactly what kind of care she might have received
while she was unconscious.

A dressing gown hung on the back of the door.
It was locked,
of course,
but even if it hadn't been
she wasn't quite ready to face whatever lay on its other side.
She had been *shot*.
She could have died,
and—

She sniffled angrily and wiped her face on the dressing gown.
She really had thought they could escape,
and now she just felt stupid.

She lay back down on the bed (carefully) and closed her eyes.
A moment later she squeezed her lids shut more tightly,
but it didn't help.
The schematic of herself wasn't there any more.
Nothing was,
not even a simple wireframe of a hammer.
All she could see was the dots and swirls that everyone saw behind their eyelids.

Something cold stirred in her belly.
Maybe the loss was temporary.
Maybe things had just gone back to the way they were
and images would appear when they wanted to instead of on demand.
Or maybe it was gone for good and she could get on with her life,
though she knew it couldn't ever be what it had been.
She had wanted so much to move on,
to go somewhere and be someone and have an adventure,
and now that it had actually happened she still wanted all of that,
she just wanted a choice
instead of having things happen to her.
Mysteries,
it turned out,
were a lot more fun in sims.

She didn't know who to expect if the door opened.
The governor?
If so, which one?
Not that it seemed to matter much.
Would it be Iñacio,
looking worried,
or Johnson Wales with an apology?
Or would it be Honesty?
She was pretty sure the Marine who had given her first aid
hadn't actually been Honesty,
just another teenager with a narrow chin and button nose
temporarily possessed by someone who had been dead longer than
the people frozen in the bunker had been waiting for someone to defrost their remains.

She was still thirsty,
but she was tired too,
so she closed her eyes and let sleep take her away.

She woke in an actual bed with sheets
rather than her sleeping bag on the *Guinevere*.
Gray light came through a small window high in the wall.
She sat up and winced.
Someone had dressed her in gray cotton shorts and a matching tank top.
The bandage stuck to her stomach was bright blue.
She felt on her back,
somehow already knowing she would find a matching one there.

She slid her feet into the slippers waiting on the floor
and frowned as she took the dressing gown from the back of the door
and slid her arms into the sleeves.
She had never worn slippers or a dressing gown in her life—she only knew them
from Aunt Naggie's romance sims.
But it all felt somehow familiar,
as did her thirst.

She sat back down on the bed and closed her eyes,
willing a schematic of herself to appear.
Nothing happened.
All she could see was the dots and swirls that everyone saw.

*Phosphenes,* she thought.
They were called phosphenes,
but how did she know that?
Panic roiled in her gut,
cold and slippery as if she had somehow swallowed a live jellyfish.

That thought pulled her back to her feet.
She knew the door would be locked,
but she tested the handle anyway.
"Well shad," she said aloud as it opened with a faint click.

The hall outside was as featureless as her room.
The floor was tiled with squares of slate-colored linoleum
just like the ones in the Sandhus' store.
The walls and ceiling were iceberg gray.
She couldn't see where the light was coming from
or how far the corridor went:
it seemed to stretch away forever in both directions.
The doors were rectangular outlines with handles
identical to the one that had just closed behind her with another faint click.

"Hello?"
She took a step, then hesitated.
She was sure the lettering on the door opposite her hadn't been there a moment before.
Was it motion-sensitive?
She stepped back:
the letters stayed visible.
They definitely *were* letters,
so why couldn't she read them?

"Hello?" she said again.
Her words disappeared without an echo as if she had never spoken,
but now she could hear something in the distance
like the steady *shush shush shush* of waves against the side of a ship.
That sound had been a constant background in her life
for as long as she could remember,
just like the smell of the sea.

The smell.
She could smell the ocean.
Wherever she was,
she was close to salt water.
Halley?
Rothera?
Another secret hideout somewhere?
There seemed to be a surprising number of those scattered around Antarctica,
although to be honest,
she wasn't really sure how many would have been unsurprising.

She hesitated again before grasping the handle in front of her.
It resisted for a moment, then turned with a click and pulled it open.

The room inside was identical to the one she had woken up in,
right down to the rumpled sheet on the bed.
All of a sudden she was tired as well as thirsty,
so she lay down on it and closed her eyes and let sleep take her away.

She woke in an actual bed with sheets.
Gray light came through a small window.
The bandage stuck to her stomach under her gray cotton tank top was bright blue.
Its twin tugged at the skin on her back
as she kicked the slippers on the floor aside and opened the door.
The hall outside was tiled with slate-colored linoleum squares.
*Just like the Sandhus',* she thought.
The light came from nowhere in particular,
painting the walls and ceiling iceberg gray.

The door behind her closed with a faint click.
There was lettering on the door opposite her,
but opening it felt—she lowered her hand.
She and Jeep had played hive a few times.
The thought of opening the door gave her the same feeling as
the thought of placing a piece exactly where her opponent wanted her to.

The corridor stretched away to infinity in both directions.
Waves shushed in the distance
and the tang of salt water tickled her nose
as she considered her options.
It all seemed familiar.
How many times had she been here before?
How many of these doors had she opened,
only to find herself back in the room she had left?

Sometimes the only way to win was not to play.
She sat on the floor with her back against the wall and closed her eyes.
Phosphenes danced behind her eyelids.
She hugged herself so that her hands were hidden in her armpits
and pinched hard.
That felt real,
but that didn't mean anything.
If this was some kind of virtual reality,
whatever machine she was plugged into could simulate a pinch
just as easily as it could make her believe
there was a wall behind her back
or that she was thirsty.

"I ain't playin' no more," she said aloud.
The corridor swallowed her words without even a trace of an echo.
She wrapped her arms around her knees and put her head down on her knees to wait.

Her shoulders tensed involuntarily when she heard a door open somewhere in the distance.
She kept her head down as footsteps approached.
Fabric rustled as someone sat opposite her.

"You really are quite extraordinary,"
the governor said without preamble.
"If circumstances were different I would probably offer you a job of some sort."
He chuckled.
"I suspect that if I did that,
I would be working for *you* in rather short order."

Iffy didn't move.

"I'm not actually a villain,"
the governor continued gently.
"I admit I've done some terrible things,
but every single one of them was absolutely necessary.
Things are getting worse,
Citizen Kwan,
and we still can't see the bottom of the pit.
Every time we think we've patched a hole in the world,
entropy breaks through in a dozen other places.
Your ecologist and his friends think they can save enough to start over,
but simulation after simulation says they're wrong.
Even the machines seem to be afraid these days,
though what they seem to be afraid of most,
surprisingly,
is you."

Fabric rustled again as he stood.
"For what it's worth,
I'm sorry.
If there was another way to do this—"

Iffy waited for him to finish his sentence.
The moment stretched and stretched.
"Are you gonna kill me?"
she asked,
her voice muffled by her knees.

"No,"
the governor said neutrally.
"You're just not going to be yourself for a while."
He sighed.
"Quite a long while, in fact.
Goodbye, Citizen Kwan.
Believe it or not,
it has been a pleasure."

Without warning her thirst was back,
more powerful than ever before.
She was almost grateful as she fell into something deeper and darker than sleep.

</section>

<section markdown="1">

It took half an hour to collect the other two bags that Wales had thrown off the train.
Iffy didn't ask how he had snuck aboard without being detected,
or how he had managed to get off.
As they trudged back to the waiting escape pod her thoughts were on her First.
Third had mostly looked after her with Fourth's occasional grudging help.
Iffy could remember an old woman with dark eyes and a sun-wrinkled face,
but that was about all.

Dinner was a double helping of cold ration bars.
*At least these ones taste diff'rent,*
Iffy thought as she chewed and swallowed.

Wales waited until she was done before giving her the rest of his news.
Halley's governor was locked away somewhere,
Paddington's was missing,
Brazilian ships were patrolling the coast,
and the *Guinevere* was still docked in Rothera.
"As bait," he shrugged.

She nodded and gave him an abbreviated version of her escape with Iñacio
and what had happened in Bharati.
His expression soured when she described the imprinted soldiers she had encountered.
"I've always wondered what actually happened.
But yours is just…gone?"

Iffy shrugged.
"I think so.
Can't talk t' her no more,
an' I don't think I got any o' her skills.
Tell you th' truth,
I kinda miss her.
It was like havin' a big sister or somethin'."
She hesitated.
"Any chance you seen Aunt Naggie or Honesty?
De got der call-up just before things blew up."

"You can blame the governor for that," Wales said.
"When Rothera's core told him you two were a thing
he thought he could der for leverage.
I'm sorry I didn't—"

"Stop sayin' that."
Iffy crumpled the ration bar's wrapper into a ball
and stuffed it into the little recycler Wales had unpacked.
"Stop sayin' you're sorry about this an' you regret that an' whatever.
It don't fix anything."

"Sorry,"
Wales said after a moment's pause,
then spread his hands when Iffy glared at him.

He stood and stretched.
"We probably shouldn't stay here much longer.
How about I rig myself a seat on this crash bucket of yours
while you figure out what we're going to do next?"

"I already know th' what,"
she said.
"What I gotta figure out is how."
She hesitated,
remembering what had happened when she and Sandrine had stolen the hovercraft.
"Don't s'pose you brought any o' my medicine with you?"

Wales shook his head.
"Sorry, but—okay, okay, um,
*unfortunately* it would have been too risky.
As far as I know the only supply in Rothera is on board your ship,
and if I'd tried to get it…"
He shrugged,
not needing to finish his sentence.

"Yeah."
Iffy rummaged around for a moment,
then pulled a sterile wipe out of the escape pod's medical kit,
tore it in half,
and stuffed the pieces in her nostrils.
"Here we go."

*Imagine being born with cataracts in your eyes,
unable to see anything more than blurs of light.
Now imagine that one day someone removed them.
You would still only see blurs
because your brain would never have had a chance to learn that
this pattern is a wall
and this other pattern is a chair.
People might have told you that things looked smaller if they were far away,
but the words alone wouldn't mean anything.
It would be weeks or months before you could make sense of
the signals your eyes were now able to send to your brain,
but it would get easier with practice.*

*Later,
lying in a sleeping bag in a tent two hundred kilometers away
while Wales spread a net of thermally superconductive cables around them
to hide the heat of their bodies from infrared sensors,
Iffy wondered whether talking to the machines was getting easier
because she had been doing it more often
or because of her time with Sandrine
or because she now knew where her ability had come from.
In the end she decided it didn't matter.
What mattered was that diving into that other world of information
felt more like opening her eyes
each time she did it.
Finding what she wanted was no more difficult now than reaching for a cup of tea,
and what had once seemed as chaotic as the Dance Hall market in Rothera
was now full of currents and rhythms and poetry.
She didn't understand it yet,
but for the first time she felt that she might.*

*And for the first time,
she had a plan.*

</section>
