People compare the desert to many different things. The pirates of Ini
Bantang and Barra Bantang say it is like the ocean: broad, trackless,
and completely indifferent to the fates of those who travel across it.
The tribesmen of Darp say it is just a hot, barren version of their own
great plains, while the Avauntois who look down on the Karaband from
their flying mountain simply shrug and say, "It's brown, and boring."
The silver-masked priests and princesses of Thind think it is like their
own country, full of lost cities, caravans cursed to wander forever,
monsters left over from the Angels' Disputation, and revenge.

All of these things are true, but none of them are right.

---

Thind has been an empire for a thousand years. At times, its masked
rulers have governed everything from the Wise River in the north to Ini
Bantang in the south, and from Cap di Perçalle in the west to the East
Pole itself---everything, of course, except the dragon's isles. It has
twice been conquered by the Darpani, and twice more torn itself to
pieces with magic in a human echo of the Angels' Disputation.

Today, people say of the Thindi that they never do anything for the
first time. They have a ritual for everything: a new year's first cup of
tea, the beginning or end of marriage negotiations with a business
acquaintance, the death of a favorite pet. They have rules for how one
should dress, too, rules so precise that they leave almost nothing to
whim. If you see a man wearing a *dhoti* folded two finger widths below
his navel, a turban knotted in the rear, and rope sandals with
unbleached tie strings, you may know that he is the unlettered youngest
son of a peasant family that does not own its own hippo. Put a plain
shawl on his shoulders, and you may know that he can read; knot his
turban differently, and you proclaim that he is the oldest son, or a
middle child (whom the Thindi consider unlucky, since they cause so much
trouble).

In the Karaband, on the other hand, people are proud of the fact that no
two *deels* are exactly alike. We lengthen them, shorten them, add
pockets in common or unlikely places, reinforce the shoulders if we
frequently carry heavy loads... Over time, every *deel* learns from its
wearer how to do its job better, and every Karabandi learns how to read
a person's life from their *deel*.

---

- Discover that Eimin's father left years ago.
- The water stone used to supply the palace gardens
  - Now sustains the village
- Mention that other villages (Aphsi and *nif*) have failed
  - The desert is getting dryer
- Razi reveals the Other Hand to Eimin
- Aphsi-dominated secret society that protects the deep-desert villages
- Eimin is being trained to join it
- Central moral issue: is acceptance worth your soul?

---

- Eimin's sixteenth birthday
- He's apprenticing to be a carpenter
- This is where he changes path
- Suresh sows doubts about Razi
- Need to see what Aphsi society is like, so that Eimin's isolation is clear

---

- Eimin interrupts Suresh and Hediyeh
- Suresh is asking questions about the water stone
- Eimin finds his "still center"
- Hediyeh is shocked that he can creep up on her, then frightened by his feelings
- Suresh is just embarrassed

---

I hiked out to Tin Point the next day. I kept my pack light: three
canteens, my tent, some dry date bread, my knife, and my climbing rope.
I don't know why I took the climbing rope. Or the knife, for that
matter. I took my sketchbook as well, and my box of charcoals.

I skirted the goat pasture so that I wouldn't have to explain where I
was going to Grappa Uzman. It's funny---when I was little, I loved to
pet and feed his goats, and listen to his stories about chasing away
gargoyles, or the time he went half-way to Ossisswe to sell one that had
blue eyes. Now that I'm older, I'd love to hear those stories again. At
sixteen, though, I thought the stories were as boring as the grownups
who told them. Besides, he would probably ask me where I was going, and
since he wasn't *nif*, I wouldn't be able to lie.

The path ran through the lemon grove, along the hill overlooking the
palace, then down past the watchtower where I'd killed the gargoyle to
the old shoreline. The Sea of Glass was dazzling. I put on my sun
goggles as I walked. The secret to traveling long distances, I'd
discovered, was to create a rhythm in my head. My feet were its
backbone: left, right, left, right. I imagined a little wordless tune on
top of it, da-dum-di-dum-di-diddle, da-dum-di-dum-di-day. If I had my
hands hooked through the shoulder straps of my pack, I tapped another
little pattern with my fingers: first-fourth-second-third-thumb, then
fourth-second-third-first-thumb. I could go a hundred paces or more with
a single pattern. When I grew tired of that, I tried to see how many
different words I could spell using just the letters from a word like
"eucalyptus" or "catastrophe".

And I had conversations, lots of them. Sometimes they were "should have
saids"---things I didn't think of saying at the right time that would
have been funny, or cutting, or made me seem wise. A lot of times I
imagined myself rescuing someone from lions, or climbing down a sheer
cliff to save a child who'd slipped and fallen. I fought duels with
bandits in the middle of gritstorms, beat off whole flocks of gargoyles,
and snuck in and out of magicians' palaces without leaving so much as my
breath behind.

Oh, you're laughing, but we've all had daydreams like that. I would
never have told anybody about them when I was sixteen, any more than I
would have stopped to talk to Grappa Uzman. They were just a way to pass
the time while I was walking, and more fun than my real life.

I stopped for a drink and a mouthful of date bread when I reached the
shore. On a whim, I dropped my pack and walked out fifty paces onto the
glass. The three fish Razi had once showed me were still there, frozen
in the glass a double arm's length below me. The one in front was bent
slightly, as if it had been about to turn left when things changed. I'd
never noticed before, but a shallow depression had been worn into the
glass above the fish. People had been coming and looking at them for a
thousand years. They were long gone, but the fish were still there. I
felt a little foolish after a moment, so I walked back to the beach and
kept going.

I stayed on the trail after that. It would actually have been easier to
walk on the glass---it was flatter, and there weren't any potholes---but
I was going to spend the next two days doing that. I pulled a stubby
leaf off a raspberry cactus as I walked and chewed it to a pulp to kill
my thirst.

There is life all around in the desert, if you know where to look. There
was a spider web on that cactus, for example. The spider might have been
hiding from the sun down among the cactus's roots, but she was there. I
saw finger lizards sunning themselves on rocks, and an S-curve across
the road that some snake had left the night before. A shirrup followed
me for half an hour or more, flitting from rock to bush to cactus,
sometimes ahead of me, sometimes behind, hoping for a crumb of date
bread, or maybe just waiting to see if I would scare something tastier
than finger lizards into breaking cover.

I slept beneath an overhanging rock during the middle of the day. I
allowed myself two mouthfuls of water before I closed my eyes---you
sweat less when you're not moving, so my body would have a chance to
soak it all up. I kept my knife in my hand as I dozed, as Razi had
taught me. I'd been worried the first few times that I would cut myself
in my sleep, but I never had. I still didn't do it when I was at home in
my own hammock, though.

I reached the cache at the end of Tin Point about an hour before
sundown. It was marked by a pile of rocks that came up to my waist.
There were water bottles underneath them, and sealed jars of honeyed
fruit, medicines, bandages, even some firewood. I didn't take
anything---it was only for emergencies. But it was a good place to camp,
so I did.

I washed down a thick slice of date bread with what was left in my first
canteen and pulled my sketchbook out of my bag. The sun had just touched
the horizon, and the whole Sea of Glass had turned red and orange, as if
it were on fire. I drew the lines of the frozen waves as quickly as I
could, smudging them with my thumb to make shadows. The sea had been
calm here, when the great spell came. I thought it must have been a
beautiful day.

I stopped sketching when the creeping shadows reached me. I yawned and
rolled my shoulders to get out the kinks, tucked my sketchbook back in
my pack, and wrapped myself in my traveling robe for warmth. Finally, as
the small creatures of the evening began to stir, I couldn't avoid
thinking about what Suresh had said any longer.

There were a hundred reasons why it couldn't be true. Something like
that could never be kept secret. And besides, the Aphsi didn't have
magicians. No-one knew why, but people who could *drome* never had a
talent for magic.

But maybe it wasn't a secret. Maybe grownups just didn't talk about it
around children. Maybe they were waiting until they could *drome* that I
was ready to accept it. Maybe that was another of the Other Hand's
tests.

I realized suddenly that I was playing finger-patterns on the ground,
one-four-three-two-thumb, thumb-four-one-three-two. I took a deep breath
and relaxed. What if---just supposing it was true. Just supposing. Did
my mother know? Had someone come to her and my father and said, "It has
been decided"? Or was there some sort of lottery? Or had they
volunteered? I thought about my mother, heavy and round like Hediyeh's
mother had been when she was carrying the twins. A dark figure bowed its
head and put its hand on her belly. The air tingled with power, and---

I shook my head. It couldn't be true. Being *nif* was just bad luck,
that was all. And anyway, if I'd been made *nif*, then Jephel must have
been made that way too. I snorted. FIXME: something disparaging.

The stars had come out. I closed my eyes and dreamed of Jephel wearing a
magician's embroidered robe, turning himself into a goat by mistake.

I woke up as the sky started to pale. It only took me a moment to make
water and shoulder my pack. Dawn is the best time to walk on glass. The
glare is bad, but you miss the worst of the heat. I put on my goggles
and set off.

Once I was on it, the sea didn't seem as calm as it had the evening
before. The frozen waves were a couple of feet high, which meant that
the surface was never exactly flat. My ankles always felt like they
wanted to roll over. Every few paces, I had to step up onto the crest of
the next wave. My thighs started to burn after a few hundred steps, but
the feeling passed and I found my rhythm, step step step and up, over
and over again.

I waited until the sun was halfway to noon before putting up my
umbrella. I was quite proud of it---it was made out of Bantangui bamboo,
and I was always careful to roll the cloth, rather than letting it fold,
so it wasn't cracked or creased. Best of all, the handle slipped into a
sock I'd sewn onto the side of my pack, so that I had my hands free
while I walked.

Nothing lives on the glass. Parents tell their children stories about
glass turtles, and glass crabs, and even glass squid, but they're just
stories. Even the birds don't go very far from shore. Underneath is a
different story: there are places where springs well up, and just enough
light gets through the glass for life to bloom. Grappa Uzman told me
once that there were places where the glass had cracked, and trees had
sprouted, but he never said where that was, and from the smiles on other
children's faces, I guessed they could *drome* he was just telling a
story.

I hiked until early in the afternoon, then pitched my tent with the
silver side out to reflect away the sun. Lying inside was like being in
an oven, but walking would have been worse. I drank some water and tried
to take shallow breaths. I had been turning Suresh's words over and over
in my head while I walked. What if? What if it was true? What if that
was why my father had left?

I closed my eyes and did something I hadn't done since I was little. I
tried to *drome*. For a while, I believed that if only I wanted it
enough, if I really tried, somehow I'd be able to. Then I laughed at
myself. The nearest living things were half a day's walk behind me. Even
if I could suddenly *drome*, how would I tell?

I crawled out of my tent late in the afternoon and set off again. If I
walked until midnight, slept for three or four hours, then pushed myself
hard, I'd be at the fishing fleet by mid-day. I wished that I had saved
some of the raspberry cactus---I was going to have enough water, but I
was thirsty whenever I let myself think about it. So I tried to think
about other things, which meant about Suresh kissing Hediyeh, and Jephel
dancing with Mureya, and how long it would be before someone found me if
I slipped and broke my ankle on the glass.

The sun went down. The stars came out. My thoughts chased themselves
around and around in my head. It could be true, I decided. That didn't
mean it was, but it could be. Only a few Aphsi would have to know. My
mother probably didn't. Even Razi might not. The Other Hand, or somebody
else, could just decide, and have their magician make the spell, without
telling anyone else. Then they could wait to see who worked out, and who
didn't. Somebody like Jephel would just grow up to be a butcher. Someone
like me would be taught how to hunt and climb, how to move silently, how
to become so still inside that even the most sensitive Aphsi in the
world couldn't---

That was it. All of the exercises Razi had given me, teaching me to
quiet my thoughts and let go of my feelings. They weren't really to
teach me how to hide my *deroma* from Aphsi. What would be the point of
that? They were trying to see if I could control my anger enough to be
told that being *nif* wasn't just bad luck. Suresh was right.

I stopped in my tracks. I had never felt anything like the cold, clear
rage that filled me at that moment. I wanted to hurt somebody. I wanted
to drag them out into the village square and tell the whole world what
they'd done. I wanted to blind them, put out their ears, make them *nif*
like me, then leave them lying there, weeping. I didn't know who they
were, but I was going to find out.

I almost turned around to head straight back to Medef, but instead I
stayed on my original course. "A fatal mistake can sometimes save you a
few minutes of thought," Razi told me once. If I went back to Medef
then, everyone in the village would be able to *drome* how angry I was.
I needed a plan, and I needed to be as clear inside as the glass beneath
my feet.

I didn't stop for sleep that night. I ate and drank as I walked, and
reached the fishing fleet at dawn.

There was nothing left of them above the glassline, not after a thousand
years, but their hulls still lay perfectly preserved in the glass. Some
of the fishermen had been thrown from deck onto the glass when the spell
came and froze the sea beneath them. One had been up to his ankles in
water-I found the two holes that showed where his friends had chipped
him out of the glass. The holes' edges had been worn smooth by time, but
I could still see where each toe had been.

I looked around for a while to see if I could find any fish bones for
good luck, but they were long gone. It felt eerie being there on my own,
surrounded by silence, looking at the moment when everything changed. I
knelt and ran my hand over a frozen bow wave, then brushed my fingers
along the worn top of the ship's hull. There was grit there, carried by
the wind. One day it would wear the waves themselves away. I slipped my
pack from my shoulders and pitched my tent.

I slept through the heat somehow. When I woke, I tore a page out of my
sketchbook, wrote, "Eimin the Nif was here" on it, and left it on the
glass underneath an empty canteen. My shadow walked tall beside me until
the sun went down.

---

- Suresh tries to get Eimin into his plans
- Aphsi know something is wrong: Hediyeh guesses that Eimin is going to run away
- Confrontation with Razi
- Eimin's mother convinces him that it's not true
- His "father" left because of her affair with Razi

---

I ran. I ran like a jackrabbit runs, like a hawk flies. I ran like I had
never run before. Cold sick fear lay heavy in my gut. The moon was
already half-way up the sky. I'm not going to make it, I thought, then
ran even faster.

I stumbled just before the top of the hill, scraping my hands and knees
as I fell. I knelt there panting for a moment, then struggled back to my
feet and kept going. The only sounds were my breathing and the steady
crunch of my sandals, left, right, left, right. Razi's sword bumped
against my hip every second step. I had to find Suresh, and stop him.

I reached the top of the hill. The palace shone in the moonlight. I
could smell lemon trees and moist earth. There! Someone was standing in
the shadows by the palace gate. No, wait, there were two people, and
they were kissing.

It was Suresh and Hediyeh. She pushed him away, then grabbed his wrists
and pulled him back. They kissed again. Good, I thought coldly. As long
as they're doing that, I don't have to worry about being seen. I cleared
my throat, spat, and started running again.

The path dipped behind a shoulder of the hill. When I could see the
palace again, the gate was open, and they were gone. Then I was running
through rows of eucalyptus, neat and square.

The trees stopped two dozen strides from the gate. I slowed to a walk,
drawing Razi's sword. The quicksilver blade took shape with a soft
gurgle, like water being poured from a jug. Heart pounding, I stepped
through the gate.

The palace music played softly around me. I let out my breath with a
whoosh. It would have stopped if the spell had already been broken.
There was still time. I closed my eyes. My heart was pounding in my
chest. I imagined calming it, soothing it, as if it were a frightened
pocket mouse. Suresh couldn't *drome*---at least, I hoped he
couldn't---but Hediyeh certainly could. Sh, be still, be still, I
thought. I imagined myself petting my heart gently, rubbing its ears,
brushing its soft fur. I imagined it growing still under my hand, until
it did.

I opened my eyes. My moonshadow was just two fingers wide. There wasn't
much time left. I trotted across the outer courtyard on the balls of my
feet and took the stairs two at a time. I was calm. I was certain. I was
as clear as your breath, empty, a quiet stream flowing without a ripple
or a wave.

I pressed myself against the wall next to the open door, then craned my
head to look into the greeting room. Empty. I slipped inside. They had
probably gone through the inner courtyard to the pool. I ran the other
way, to the audience room. A side door opened onto a narrow stairway
that led up to a window set just below the roof. When the palace was in
use, a servant would have stood there to watch for guests arriving. It
didn't overlook the pool, but it was big enough for me to squeeze
through.

I pushed Razi's sword back into its bottle, corking it with the handle.
The window was waist-high. I put both hands on the sill and hopped up
onto it, tucking my feet underneath me. It wasn't quite tall enough for
me to stand, so I leaned out, one hand on the wall for balance, the
other reaching up for the edge of the roof. The stone felt cool against
my skin. I took a breath, let go of the wall, and stepped out.

My whole weight hung from one hand for a heartbeat until my other hand
found purchase. I pulled myself up onto the roof and drew Razi's sword
once again. The stones were dark and discolored where the brief puddles
left behind by occasional storms had dried. I hunched down and crept
forward.

Suresh and Hediyeh were already in the pool, laughing and splashing.
Their clothes lay at the pool's edge. Suresh's body and legs were pale
in the moonlight, though his hands and feet and face were bark brown.
Hediyeh---Hediyeh was all one color. That's all I want to say.

Suresh lunged forward, catching Hediyeh's foot. "Stop it! Stop it!" she
squealed as he tickled her. He let go, then dove, swam beneath her,
popped up behind her, and flicked water off his fingers into her eyes as
she turned around.

"Stop!" she giggled. She wiped her face. "You swim so well. You're like
a fish."

"Thank you. I practically grew up in the water back home." He slipped
around her, heading for his clothes. "Used to spend pretty much every
summer in the lake, looking for treasure."

"Treasure? Really?" Hediyeh dog-paddled after him. I shifted my weight.
What was he doing?

"Well, no, I mean, there wasn't really any treasure." He glanced up at
the moon, then back at Hediyeh. He was at the edge of the pool now. "But
I was, I don't know, seven, maybe eight, and there was this story about
a boy who found a gold necklace and a helmet once. It was a true story,
too." He kicked himself up a few inches so that he could reach out and
pull his clothes closer.

"You're not getting out already, are you?" Hediyeh pouted.

"What? No, no, I'm just... Anyway, the boy sold them in Ossisswe, then
bought a whole herd of goats and lived happily ever after." Suresh
pulled something out of the pocket of his trousers and turned back to
Hediyeh.

"So did you ever find anything?" she asked.

"Mm hm." He held up the ring. It sparkled in the moonlight.

"Oh! Let me see!" He held it out, then pulled it away just before she
took it.

"Come and get it," he grinned. He wriggled away from her, drawing her
toward him, always out of reach. He was leading her closer to the
waterstone, directly beneath me. I tensed.

"Oh, stop teasing!" Hediyeh paddled forward. I slipped my feet out of my
sandals. Suresh was almost close enough. Almost...

Suddenly he stopped backing away. He looked up at the sky. "It's time,"
he said, and he slipped the ring onto his finger.

Hediyeh screamed in shock as the ancient haunt flooded into Suresh. He
lunged forward and grabbed her arm. "Let go! Let go!" she shrieked. She
tried to pull away, but he was too strong. He pulled her close, spinning
her around so that he could get his other arm around her neck. The ring
throbbed with red light, making the water look like blood had already
been spilled in it.

I splashed into the pool an arm's length away. My feet hit the bottom
hard. I pushed off, so that I shot halfway back out of the water again.
Hediyeh screamed again. I raised my arm. The quicksilver blade of the
sword licked the night above us. "Let go of her!" I ordered.

"Eimin!" Suresh tightened his grip on Hediyeh's neck, choking off her
scream. "What are you---"

"Let go!" I twisted in the water and feinted at him. The sword blade
snapped like a whip just inches from his head.

"Eimin, no, wait, listen to me. Listen! You have to let me do this.
Eimin, it's for both of us." He glanced up at the moon again. "Please,
Eimin, think! Think about what they did to you. Think about what they
kept from you! Once I have the power that's in that stone, I can undo
that. I can make you like everyone else. We can stop them from ever
doing it to anyone ever again. Please, Eimin, I know what you're
thinking, but it's the only way."

"You don't know what I'm thinking," I said. I flicked the sword at him
again to try to back him away from the stone. He didn't flinch this
time. The blade caught his shoulder, leaving a thin red line that
immediately started to drip. His ring brightened.

"So is that it? Are you going to be a pawn all your life, when you could
be a king?" Hediyeh pulled at his arm. Her mouth was open, her eyes
bulged. She couldn't breathe. He was choking her while he talked to me.

"I don't know what I'm going to be," I told him. I flicked the sword
again. "All I know is that you're a liar. Nobody did this to me. Nobody
made me this way. My mother wouldn't let them."

His face hardened. He took a deep breath. He was going to dive. Hediyeh
had almost stopped struggling. He was going to dive and give her death
to the stone. I was out of time.

I lunged forward. Razi's sword went right through the joint of Hediyeh's
shoulder and into Suresh's ribs. She tried to scream, but couldn't. He
could. He did. His scream was rage and pain and a thousand years of
being trapped in a little shard of glass.

He shouted a word and slapped the sword blade with the hand that wore
the ring. The blade snapped like a dry twig. He rolled in the water and
dove. I dropped the broken sword and went after him.

His ring was so bright now that it cast red-tinged shadows. Hediyeh was
limp in his arms. Dark blood made the water murky. He grabbed the corner
of the waterstone with one hand to steady himself and held her down
against it with the other. Air bubbled out of his mouth as he began the
spell.

I frog-kicked over to him and grabbed his arm. He tried to beat me away,
but the water took the force of the blow away. I was already running out
of air. The ring was blinding me. I let go of him, grabbed Hediyeh's
arm, and planted my feet on the waterstone to try to pull her away.

Cold... I have never felt cold like that. It was as if ice water was
flooding into my veins. The waterstone wanted. The cold rose through my
legs, into my body. I pulled weakly at Hediyeh's arm. It was too late.
The cold was in my heart, sucking all my strength away. I couldn't---

I twisted, and with the last of my strength I let go of Hediyeh and
jammed my fingers into Suresh's mouth to stop the spell. He bit them in
surprise, then tried to pull his head away. He couldn't let go of the
waterstone. He couldn't let go of Hediyeh. He couldn't get away from me,
so he tried to spit them out, but I hung on. I was actually holding on
to his bottom teeth for an instant.

The red glow started to fade. He shook his head from side to side
frantically. I was so cold. I couldn't feel my legs any more. The glow
flickered and died. In the last of its light I caught a glimpse of
Suresh's face. Whatever was in there looked back at me full of hate and
despair and longing, and then it was gone.

The next thing I remember I was lying on my back looking up at the
stars. I didn't know where I was. I knew I was cold, but I didn't have
the energy to fetch a blanket. My mother would look in on me in a while.
She could always *drome* when I was awake, when I was too hot or too
cold. She'd take care of me.

I blinked and turned my head as Suresh dragged Hediyeh out of the pool.
I must have made a sound, because he looked at me. Our eyes met. He
shook his head slowly and started to sob. I closed my eyes again.

---

When I woke again, Razi was beside me. He had cut his shirt into strips,
and was bandaging Hediyeh's shoulder. Suresh was gone.

"Cold..." I whispered. He nodded without looking at me, intent on his
work.

"I'll build a fire as soon as I can. She's lost a lot of blood." He
knotted another strip of shirt under her armpit, then sat back and
rubbed his ankle. "What happened?"

"Suresh...?"

Razi shook his head. "Gone. But he left this." He held up a small glass
ring. It was just glass, now. Whatever had been in it had missed its
chance.

I tried to sit up, but I was too weak. It was like one of those bad
dreams where you're a puppet whose strings have been cut, so that you
can see and hear, but you can't move. "Can't ..." I gasped. For some
reason it seemed funny to me. I started to chuckle, but it turned into a
wheeze.

Razi frowned. "Well, then who fished you out of the---oh. Hm.
Interesting." He turned the ring over in his hand thoughtfully, then
tucked it into his pocket and struggled to his feet. "And where's my
damn sword? If there's even a scratch on it..."

In the end, I went for help, so that Razi could stay and look after
Hediyeh. It wasn't a good idea. I only had to walk as far as the goat
pasture, but it seemed to take as long as my trek out to the fleet. I
stumbled lightheadedly straight into the arms of Grappa Uzman. I don't
know how much sense he made of the story I told him, but it frightened
him enough for him to send one of his grandsons back to Medef for help.
I fell asleep, shivering, as the sun came up.

It was a month before my strength returned. I spent most of that time
sleeping, or sitting on the roof, watching the world go by. A pair of
sand pigeons built a nest in the eucalyptus tree beside our house in
that month. Little Ashwara took her first steps. And somehow, Hediyeh
became a hero.

I'm still not quite sure how that happened. The waterstone had taken
even more out of her than me, and for a few days the wound in her
shoulder---the wound I'd given her---looked like it was going to go bad.
Once she was well enough to sit up and talk, though, her room was never
empty. Everyone wanted to hear the story from her, over and over,
grownups and children alike. Or maybe they could just *drome* how much
she enjoyed telling it.

Razi came to see me every day. One morning he brought three people with
him, two men and a woman. The two men asked me questions, over and over,
patiently, drawing every little detail of the story out of me. The woman
just listened and frowned.

Razi came back into my room after they left and turned his left hand
over, palm up, palm down, meaning, "The Other Hand". I nodded. I had
guessed as much. They didn't look like Razi, any more than any other
Aphsi, but there was something in their eyes, sadness and patience and
acceptance and watchfulness all at once.

"They still haven't found your friend," he said. "Someone took water and
food from the cache at Tin Point, but there's no trail. We asked Lady
Kembe to try a spell, but even she couldn't find him."

"Do you think he's dead?" I asked.

Razi shook his head. "Dead men can't hide that well. Oh, but here, I
almost forgot. This is for you." He brought his arm out from behind his
back and handed me a chessboard in a leather sleeve, and a cloth bag
full of pieces.

"Thanks. Thanks, Razi." I slipped the board out of its sleeve. "Do you
have time for a game?"

He grinned. "Always." He pulled the little lopsided table I'd made over
beside my hammock, then sat on the stool on the other side. Razi took
the bag from me and poured the pieces onto the board. A moment later he
held up two fists. "Choose."

I laughed. "Either." He laughed too, then opened his hands to show me a
pair of white pawns.
