I found the community building chapter interesting reading, covering a lot of aspects that I’d never formally put my mind to. My comments relate largely to what could be considered an overlap between this and the “Marketing” chapter.

One thing that I felt is missing is a mention of learners as a rich source for recruitment into the community. I occasionally hear from Carpentries community members that they first became involved in the organisation after attending a workshop as a learner. Often these people were actively encouraged to do so by one of the instructors. In fact, in several cases, I believe that you were the one doing the encouraging! 

In our local community efforts at EMBL, we see the same thing. While I consider everyone here a ‘member’ of our community, the bulk of the effort to make things happen is done by a small subset of the whole group. Often my first interaction with someone who then goes on to become one of these active members is through their attendance at a course, workshop, or unseminar that we have organised. 

This is linked to what I have heard referred to as the ‘pull request’ approach to recruiting volunteers by encouraging contributions in response to suggestions/feedback. i.e. “That’s a great idea, and I think it could be a good addition to the way that we do things. How can I help you make it happen?”

Of course, if you were to ask me what I would take out to add these points, I wouldn’t be able to answer satisfactorily :)

Aside from the above, I found the following typos:

1. In “Retention”, paragraph before “Government Matters”:

"What needs to they think aren’t being met, and would you be able to meet them (either on your own, or in partnership with them)?”

“What needs to” -> “What needs do"

2. In “Soup, Then Hymns”, only paragraph:

“To be effective you should therefore focus on things that are immediately useful, e.g., on what can people create that will be used by other community members write away.”

“on what can people create" -> “on what people can create”

“write away” -> “right away"

3. In “Governance”, paragraph 4:

"Broadly speaking, your organization can can either a service board, whose members also take on other roles in the organization, or a governance board whose primary responsibility is to hire, monitor, and if need be fire the director.”

“can can” -> “can have”
