
Indy took one look at the bedraggled foursome and ordered them to go straight to
the bath house.  "Except you, learned," she said told the *tralpa*.  "It would
probably be best if you stayed at home for now.  I'll have someone bring you a
couple of buckets of hot water."

"No need for that," Kulbinder rumbled before the *tralpa* could reply.  "He can
bathe with us—the boy and I will make sure he doesn't wander off."

The reeve nodded.  Wrapping his robe and whatever was left of his dignity around
him, Scholar-Candidate Nangyal squelched across the square toward the village's
communal bath house.

Noxy had never been so happy to see hot water in her life.  The women's half of
the bath house was empty, so she stripped down to her underclothes and started
to pump the polished handle of the pump that stood in the center of the room.
Water gurgled through cured bamboo pipes, then splashed into the stone trough
that waited beneath the pump's spout.  Within moments the water began to steam
as the spell put on the trough by the village's previous *tralpa* heated it up.

One bucket, two buckets, three… By the time Noxy had filled her favorite tub,
the work of pumping had driven the chill off her skin.  She hung her
underclothes over the side of the tub and stepped into bliss.  She couldn't
straighten her legs the way she had been able to as a little girl, but it still
felt wonderful.  She took a deep breath—

—and jumped as the door burst open.  "Could you *knock* next time?" she
snapped at Sensy.

Her friend stared at her.  "Why?  Nobody else does."

"Well, maybe they should start," Noxy grumbled.

Sensy rolled her eyes, then pulled up a stool and sat down.  "So Granna Fee says
you rescued the *tralpa*.  What happened?"

"I'll tell you if you get me some more hot water."  Sensy pouted but got up and
started pumping while Noxy brought her up to date.  She left out the part where
the troll brought back Private Thokmay's sword, and how annoyed she had been
that he clearly didn't believe her when she said she didn't know why.

"Saints," Sensy breathed when Noxy was done.  "You could have been killed!"

Noxy shrugged.  "I suppose.  Aaah…" she added as her friend poured a fresh
bucket of hot water into the wooden tub.

Sensy sat down once again.  "So what's he like?  Private Thokmay, I mean, not
the *tralpa*."

Noxy shrugged again.  "I don't know.  He doesn't say much."

Sensy leaned forward.  "Did he say how he got those scars on his face?  Rash
said it looked like the tiger had clawed him."

"Maybe," Noxy allowed, thinking about the matching scars she had seen on the
young soldier's arm when he fell on her.  She was definitely *not* sharing that
part of the story with Sensy.

But the thought led her to another.  It was time to figure out why her two best
friends were mad at each other.  "So what's going on with you and Rash?" she
asked as casually as she could.

Out of the corner of her eye she saw Sensy freeze.  "What do you mean?"

"Oh, please."  Noxy flicked a few drops of water at her.  "I'm not blind."

Sensy squirmed.  "I know.  I just—I was going to tell you when we were out
picking spiderwebs, but then—you know, everything just kind of happened and we
haven't really had a chance to talk since then and—you're not mad, are you?"

"Me?  Why would I be mad?" Noxy asked blankly.  What was Sensy talking about?
She and Rash were the ones who were mad at each other, weren't they?

"I don't know.  I thought—I mean, it's not like he won't dance with both of
us—when they bring the herd in," Sensy continued in a rush, "He asked me to go
to the spring fancy with him and I said yes.  I'm really glad you aren't mad."

"Of course not," Noxy said, trying her best to sound as though she meant it.
The spring fancy was the biggest celebration of the year in Stale, bigger even
than Yearagain Eve.  When the adults brought the village's clouds back to Stale
and the first pack traders came through the pass, every family decorated their
house with whatever funny or scary ornaments they had spent the winter making,
then put on their best clothes and gathered in the village square to tell
stories and exchange gifts and above all, to dance.  She and Sensy and Rash had
gone together ever since they were little, but now…

"Of course not," Noxy repeated briskly.  "Though if you ask me, you ought to
tell him that he has to shave that ridiculous mustache he's trying to go before
he tries to kiss you."

"He's already kissed me," Sensy confessed, blushing slightly as she tucked one
of her braids back behind her ear.  "It tickled, kind of."

"Oh."  Noxy digested that.  She felt stupid for not having figured out what was
going on, and also, suddenly, very alone.

"Anyway, what about Private Thokmay?  You could ask him to the fancy," Sensy
suggested, then exclaimed, "It was just an idea!" as Noxy flicked more water at
her.

"It was a stupid idea," Noxy grumbled.  "I don't even know if I'm going to go
this year."

"See?  I *knew* you'd be mad," Sensy sighed.

"I'm not mad!" Noxy said angrily, sinking lower into the tub.  In the silence
that followed, she heard voices murmuring on the other side of the wall.  The
petulant tone of the first had to belong to the *tralpa*, and the deep rumble of
the second could only be the tiger.  For one moment she wondered what would
happen if she invited *him* to the fancy.

"Anyway," Sensy broke in, standing and brushing her hands against her trousers,
"I should go and see if anyone needs help with anything.  Aft says the storm's
going to be a big one.  See you later?"

"Sure."  Noxy waited until she heard the door close before pulling her knees to
her chest and closing her eyes and wondering why everything suddenly seemed so
hard.

Stale was no stranger to storms.  When bulls battled each other in the dead of
winter, the snow fell so thick and so fast that people had to string ropes
between the houses to find their way.  And in the summer, when nimbus clouds
that had stayed in the north to give birth flew south to rejoin their herds, the
sky could darken in the time it took to sing a nursery rhyme.  When that
happened, the villagers knew it was time to tie their shutters closed and get
the camels into their pens, because the rain was going to come down in sheets
instead of drops.

"I am from Thind," Kulbinder growled when Indy told him why she wanted the
soldiers to stay in the trading hall.  "I have lived through monsoons.  This
could not possibly be worse."

"Maybe not, but I bet it'll be a lot colder," she said.

Kulbinder sniffed.  "Storm or not, someone should be on patrol.  But I agree, it
would be best if the men stayed warm."

"How is Thokmay doing?" Noxy asked hesitantly.  She had changed into her other
shirt and trousers, then hung her muddy clothes over the rack behind the house
in the hope that the rain would do at least half the work of washing them clean.

The tiger blinked slowly.  "He is well," he said.  "I have set him to watch over
the *tralpa* until some other arrangement can be made."

The sun had almost disappeared behind the mountains when the first sharp line of
lightning lashed the far-off clouds.  Granna Fee said a word Noxy wasn't
supposed to know.  "Let's not dawdle," she said briskly, settling a canvas tarp
over her vegetable plot and weighting it down with stones.  Children, elders,
and everyone else who could walk hurried to ready the village, stepping around
soldiers or shooing them out of the way.

When Noxy got home, her mother was chopping onions.  "Thanks, sweetling," she
said, blinking away a tear.  "Can you do some potatoes?  And see if the cheese
is still fit to eat.  I hope the tiger isn't too picky."

Noxy pulled up short.  "The tiger?"

Indy sniffled.  "Yes, he's coming for dinner with the sergeant."  She swept a
double handful of diced onions into the cooking pot with the back of the knife
and started peeling what was probably the last knob of ginger in Stale.  "It's
the polite thing to do," she continued without looking as Noxy opened and then
closed her mouth.

"Yes, *amma*."  Noxy set the loosely-woven bag of potatoes on the potato and
began to scrub the skins off them with a piece of pumice.

Sergeant Dorbu knocked on their door just as the rain began to fall.  Noxy had
been expecting him to be in his uniform, but he had traded in his battle mask
for a simple knit cap that any cloudherd might have worn, and had left his sword
behind.

Kulbinder padded in behind him while he and Indy were saying their hellos.  He
flowed up onto the chair across from Noxy and watched impassively as she swept
the last scraps of potato off the table.  "He sends his greetings," the tiger
said abruptly.

Noxy jumped slightly.  "Oh.  You mean Thokmay?  Um, thank you.  I'm glad he's
all right.  It's pretty dangerous, getting frozen like that.  It happened to one
of the camels a couple of years ago.  She got out of their pen and tried to get
across the—um.  It doesn't matter.  I'm glad he's all right."  She could feel
her cheeks burning under the tiger's cool stare.

Her cheeks heated up even more when she saw Sergeant Dorbu's grin.  "Don't
worry," he said cheerfully.  "He does that to everyone.  Saints, I almost
swallowed my fork the first time I met him."

"It was a spoon," Kulbinder corrected.  "And it was more than 'almost'."

And just like that the rhythm of the meal took shape.  Sergeant Dorbu had a
seemingly inexhaustible supply of stories about his own foolishness, clumsiness,
or bad choices.  Indy asked just enough questions to keep the stories coming,
while Kulbinder's dry comments provoked protests of innocence and occasional
snorts of laughter.  As she table a tray bearing grilled slabs of cheese, fried
onions, and boiled potatoes, Noxy realized with a start that she was actually
enjoying herself.  The mood was only slightly dampened by the tiger sniffing at
the cheese and then saying thank you, but it would probably upset his digestion,
he would hunt in the forest after the storm was over.

Conversation became more serious after the dishes were cleared.  The soldiers
had been on the move almost constantly since they had taken Learned Shudarga's
side.  "Getting to a fight, or getting away from one, or trying to get enough
food in our bellies to keep us fighting—that's mostly what being a soldier is
about, not the fighting itself," Sergeant Dorbu sighed.

"So why did you chose her side?" Indy asked as she splashed some dark mountain
*rak* into a glass and passed it to him.  Catching Noxy's eye, she poured a
thimbleworth into another glass and handed it to her daughter.  The pungent
fumes tingled in Noxy's nose as she tasted it gingerly.

Sergeant Dorbu rolled his glass between his hands to warm it.  "My family used
to have land.  Not much—a couple of hundred apple trees and some corn—but it
was enough to keep us.  Then one of our neighbors decided she wanted to build a
mill, and, well, we were on the other side of the river she had her eye on, so
she honeyed up the local *tralpa*, promised him a slice of the takings, and…"
He spread his hands.  "By the time we got to court, she'd rented all the laws
that would have saved us.  We had a week to clear out after living their all our
lives."

"That must have been horrible," Indy said sympathetically.

"It is foolishness," Kulbinder rumbled.  "The law in Thind is not something one
rents like a bullock for plowing.  There are rules for each station, and that is
that."

"But then how does the king raise money?" Noxy asked.

Kulbinder blinked slowly.  "He takes what tradition dictates.  It is much
simpler."

"Simpler *and* fairer," Sergeant Dorbu added with a quiet intensity that hadn't
been there a moment earlier.  "And that's what we want—something simple and
fair.  Laws should be there for everyone, all the time, not just for whoever has
the most money on the day of a trial.  And if that means a bunch of royals have
to work for a living instead of renting out laws some king gave their
great-great-grands way back when, that's fine by me."  He drained his glass in
one quick gulp.  When her mother did the same, Noxy held her breath and
swallowed her own *rak*.

The thick black liquid felt like fiery smoke as it went down her throat.  She
clenched her jaw, but a strangled cough managed to escape.  "And that's enough
for *you* tonight," her mother said in mock-disapproval.

"Yes, *amma*," Noxy said, gasping for air.

"Here."  Her mother pushed the empty kettle across the table.  "How about you
refill that and I'll make tea?  It sounds like the worst of the storm has
passed, and a bit of air will good for you after that."

Noxy nodded, not trusting herself to speak.  She slipped her feet into her boots
without bothering to do up the laces, pulled a poncho over her head, and
stumbled out into the night.

Rain was still falling, but Indy had been right—most of the panicked clouds
had passed, and the few stragglers trying to catch up were already east of
Stale, heading toward the plains.  She watched them for a moment, then closed
her eyes.

"Camel," she muttered a moment later.  Of *course* she hadn't been able to
mind-hear anything.  What had happened earlier with Big Blue had been a
coincidence.  She shouldn't—

Something clattered in the narrow alley between her house and the yarning shed.
Noxy opened her mouth to ask who was there, but stopped herself.  What if the
troll had come back?  She set the kettle down quietly on the front step of her
house and tiptoed gingerly toward the alley.  Holding her breath, she leaned
forward and peeked around the corner, just in time to see a hooded figure
disappear out the other end.  It was definitely a person, not a troll, but who
would be out in the rain?  Suspicious, she hurried to follow.

"Ow!"  Ten steps in, her foot connected with a pile of cobblestones that she and
Sensy had put there as part of some long-forgotten game.  The stones clattered
as they tumbled over.  Cursing under her breath, she stepped over them, wishing
that she had taken a moment earlier to do up her laces.  Some of the broken
cobbles had sharp edges, and if she lost a boot now, she'd never catch up.

As she reached the other end of the alley the shadowy figure disappeared around
the corner of the shed where the villagers hung sheets of moss to dry for use in
the outhouse.  She hesitated for only a moment before sprinting after it, her
boots splashing in shallow puddles of rainwater.  Whoever she was chasing was
bound to hear her, but maybe she could catch them first.

When she rounded the corner, though, her quarry was gone.  "Rot," she cursed.
Left toward the trading hall, straight on toward the square, or right toward the
vegetable patches and the gate?

*Crack!* She shrieked with surprise as a bolt of lightning split the sky, then
stomped her foot, angry at herself, the rain, and the world in general.  Whoever
it was had gotten away.  And by the time she got back, her mother was sure to
give her the "what took you so long?" look that she hated so much.

*Crack!* Another bolt of lightning left a dazzling scar on the night.  That one
had been close, she realized uneasily—too close.  The lightnings must still be
nipping at the clouds that had fallen behind their herd.  She was suddenly glad
that she wasn't airborne.  She had only ever been on one night flight, on her
nameday the year before to look at stars with Granna Fee, and never in a storm.

*CRACK! BOOM!* Noxy shrieked as the third bolt of lightning struck the weather
duck that stood next to the fortress gate and shattered its wooden pole.
Splinters flew in all directions to clatter off roofs and cobblestones.

One smoking scrap bounced off a chimney and clattered through a window whose
shutter had been left untied.  As Noxy blinked to clear the after-dazzle of the
lightning strike from her eyes, the sheets of dried moss that the wood had
landed in began to smolder.

A door banged open.  "Saints!" Aft hurried over to Noxy.  "Are you all right?
What in the underhells are you doing out in this?"

"*Amma* wanted me to fill the kettle," Noxy said stupidly.  She shook her head.
"It—the lightning hit the weather duck."

"I can see the lightning hit it," Aft said testily.  He took her by the
shoulders and peered into her eyes, then relaxed.  "You'll be all right.  Just a
bit of a scare.  Come on, let's get you back to—wait."  He sniffed.  "What's
burning?"

Noxy grabbed his arm and pointed.  "There!  Upstairs!"  A bright lick of flame
was suddenly dancing in a window.  Another joined it as the herby smell of
burning moss caught in Noxy's nostrils.

"Get your mother!" Aft ordered, then cupped his hands around his mouth.  "Fire!
Fire!  Fire!"

The village was lucky.  That's what everyone told themselves afterward.  They
were lucky that the rain had made everything so wet, that there had been so
little moss left to burn, that Aft had spotted the fire so quickly.  They were
lucky the soldiers had been there to fill and pass buckets—with most of the
adults gone, well, the elders and children would have done the best they could,
but things could have been a lot worse.

"But what were you doing *there*?" Indy demanded as she and her daughter walked
home arm in arm.  "You were just supposed to refill the kettle!"

"I thought I saw something, like a troll."  Noxy shook her head.  "I didn't get
a good look at it."  Which wasn't exactly a lie, but was an uncomfortable
distance from the truth.  The hooded figure had definitely been a person, but
short for an adult.  And as the soldiers had arrived to help with the fire, only
one of them had been the height of the figure she had seen.  But why would
Thokmay have been out in the rain when he could have been at dinner?

*In the forest below the village, a small stream splashed and gurgled with
new-fallen rain.  No one was there to notice it tug at a small packet of letters
wrapped in wax paper.  The packet came free and slipped over the edge of the
pond to resume its journey down the mountain.*
