<section markdown="1">

## Chapter 7

Purplesday was traditionally a day of rest,
which in the mountains meant a day for people to work less hard
and on things they wanted to.
If someone called something a Purplesday quilt,
everyone knew what they meant.

It was also a day for those who felt spiritual
to gather for discussion and reflection.
Aft hadn't bothered before he married Rind,
but over the years he had absorbed his wife's faith.
The one time Grappa Gas accused him of doing it
just to give them another thing to argue about,
his son had shaken his head and replied,
"It's the last thing I want to fight about with you, *appa*."
As far as anyone knew,
it was the last time Aft had called his father that.

But that wasn't what Grappa Gas wanted to talk about
when he knocked on Indy's door that morning
and invited himself in for chai.
"Didn't believe my eyes," he said,
nodding his thanks to Noxy as she set a cup down in front of him.
"He just knocked on the door and asked Sergeant Dorbu
if any of them wanted to head up to the grove."

"And did they?"
Indy asked.

The old man shrugged.
"About half, I'd say.
Don't know if that's a lot or a little for soldiers.
I've never been one for that kind of conversation,
but even if I was,
I don't think I'd want to have it with Aft."

Indy blew on her tea reflectively.
"Well, they did help out last night.
We'd have been in real trouble without them.
And we did light fires for some of their friends.
Maybe they think that means they're not strangers any more."

"Mmph."
Grappa Gas frowned at his chai,
unable to argue but unwilling to agree.

"Did Thokmay go with them?" Noxy asked,
hastily adding,
"And the tiger?"

Grappa Gas shook his head.
"They're up on the wall by Quick Tower.
I guess cats aren't the sort for crowds."

Noxy did her best not to rush through her porridge,
then pretended not to notice the looks that her mother and Grappa Gas exchanged
when she excused herself "to go for a walk".
If they thought she was sweet on the prince—no,
on Private Thokmay, she had to remember to call him that—then
maybe they wouldn't look any further.
And if she took the time to brush her hair and scrub her face before leaving,
well,
she was only doing it so her *amma* wouldn't nag her.

Kulbinder could have been a statue if it wasn't for the wind ruffling his fur.
He sat on his hind legs,
eyes half-closed,
with his tail tucked around his haunches.
He turned his head to look at her when she said hello at the top of the stairs,
but didn't reply.

Thokmay sat next to him on the canvas-colored block of stone
that she and Rash and Sensy had used for their make-believe cloud rides.
With his legs crossed,
his head bowed,
and his hands folded neatly in his lap,
he could have been a statue as well.

Noxy hesitated.
She had seen some of the pack traders meditate,
and vaguely remembered her father doing it
the few times he had crafted a spell before—she
pushed the thought out of her head.
Interrupting him felt like it would be rude,
and the sky was a beautiful clear blue now that the storm had passed.
She could just sit and enjoy the sunshine…

"Hey."
She started and blinked her eyes.
Thokmay looked down at her,
his face carefully blank.
"You were snoring."

"What?"
She climbed to her feet and rubbed her eyes.
"I don't snore," she yawned
before nodding at Kulbinder.
"That must have been him."

"Mm."
The prince looked past her at the rich green of the forest,
then at Pillow and Big Blue floating peacefully in the cloud pen.
"We talked about your plan,
and we'd like to propose one of our own."

"Oh yeah?"
She yawned again.
"Well, propose away."

The prince looked at the tiger,
who flicked back an ear.
"We'd like to kidnap you."

It was for her sake, not theirs, Kulbinder explained.
If Sergeant Dorbu thought she had helped them,
well,
he was an honorable man,
but even honorable men did foolish things when they got angry.
On the other paw,
if people thought they had forced her to help them against her will—

"—you'll have my *amma* and Aft and everyone else chasing us,"
Noxy cut in,
more scornfully than she had intended but too cranky from dozing to care.
"We'd be lucky to make it as far as Murky Lake,
never mind Loghan-in-Loghan.
Believe me, hiding out at the bothy is a better plan."

The prince and the tiget exchanged looks.
"He doesn't like the idea of us being separated," Thokmay said.

Noxy shrugged, yawning again.
Why was she so tired?
She could barely keep her eyes open.
"Better than getting caught," she mumbled.
She sat down with her back against the wall.
"I'm just going to…"
Her eyes closed before she could say "take a nap".

*Once again she was standing beside her father's tree,
but this time she was fully dressed and wearing boots.
Was that because some part of her knew what she was actually wearing?
And why didn't she feel tired any more?*

*"Hello again."
Alva knuckle-walked toward her and sat down just out of arm's reach.
"The forest told me about the fire last night.
I hope you're all right."*

*"I'm fine.
Wait, is this why I fell asleep?
Did you do that so you could talk to me?"*

*The troll smiled.
"Not me, dear, the forest.
There is only—"*

*"—the forest," Noxy finished sourly.
"So what's so important that the forest needs to talk to me right now?"*

*"It's Signurd," Alva said.
"He is going to challenge you."*

*"Great."
Noxy sighed.
"What does that mean?
Do I have to wrestle him,
or should I start learning how to fence?
Or wait,
will it be a poetry contest like in a fairy tale?"*

*"I think you should take this a little more seriously, dear,"
the troll said primly.
"And no, it's nothing like that.
You'll meet him here, in the forest's dreams.
What happens after that will be up to the two of you."*

*Noxy looked around.
Every detail of her father's tree was somehow in focus at once.
Around it,
the rest of the grove was completely still.
There wasn't even the slightest hint of a breeze,
and the usual background of insect noise and birds chirping was missing.*

*Even as she thought that,
though,
she felt a breath of wind on her face.
The branches began to sway gently,
and somewhere nearby she heard the distinctive two-tone buzz of a carpenter bee.
Had she done that?*

*"Sort of," the troll said aloud, startling her.
"It's hard for the forest to speak to people like us.
We're so small, and our thoughts are too short and too quick.
But the wind and the smell of fresh juniper or a fallen tree?
It recognizes those."*

*"What if I don't want any of this?" Noxy asked,
running her hand over a nearby branch.
Its needles prickled against her skin.
"Will it just leave me alone?
There's kind of a lot of other things happening right now,"
she added apologetically.*

*Alva scratched her rump.
"I don't know, dear.
The forest might, but I don't think Signurd will.
He's really quite upset."*

*"Well it's not __my__ fault!"
Noxy protested.*

*Alva rose to her knuckles and feet.
"There is no fault, dear.
There is only—why are you making that face?"*

Noxy woke with a start.
The prince was cross-legged on the stone again, his eyes closed.
Kulbinder had stretched out in a patch of sunlight,
completely still except for the steady rise and fall of his chest.
Feeling a little disoriented,
she stood and looked down at Stale.
Its cobblestones still glistened in places from the previous night's rain.
Granna Fee and some other elders were rolling up the canvas
they had put down to protest the vegetable beds,
while a handful of soldiers levered the burnt remains of the upstairs shutters
out of the storehouse's windows.

She spotted Rash whistling on his way to the bath house.
Just as he arrived,
the men's door opened and the tralpa almost ran into him.
She couldn't make out the tralpa's words,
but even at this distance his sharp tone carried clearly.

Instead of stepping out of his way and making a face behind his back,
though,
Rash stepped into the tralpa's way.
Yangyal gesticulated angrily,
but Rash didn't move.
Finally the tralpa threw up his hands,
took an exaggerated step around his adversary,
and stalked off like a doused cat.

That gave Noxy an idea.
"I'll be right back," she said over her shoulder
before hurrying down the stairs.

Once,
when she was young and some cloudherds from Burned Soup came to visit,
she heard her mother say,
"Saints save me from my friends."
She had used the phrase at every opportunity for a few weeks.
She hadn't quite understood what it meant,
but it made adults laugh every time.

She muttered it under her breath
when she found Sensy waiting for her at the bottom of the stairs
with a forced smile on her face.
"Hey," she said,
putting on a smile as well.

"Hey."
Sensy held up the towels she was holding.
"It's been a while since we had some girl time,
and my *amma* and *appa* said I could take some away from chores,
and,
well,
we should catch up."

Noxy looked at the tralpa just as he rounded the corner.
"Maybe some—"

"Oh come *on*," Sensy pouted.
She tucked the towels under one arm,
slid the other through Noxy's,
and pulled her forward.

*What's gotten into __her__?* Noxy wondered.
She had always been the one dragging Sensy into things,
and she wasn't sure she liked this new upside-down world.

She got her answer once they were sitting in adjacent tubs
full of steaming water.
Sensy took a long-handled brush down from its hook,
but just held it instead of scrubbing her back.
"Well?" Noxy asked impatiently.

"Well what?"

Noxy rolled her eyes.
"Well, what do you want to talk about?
Really talk about, I mean,
because I don't think you dragged me in here
just because you need help deciding what color ribbons to sew on your shirt."

Sensy slapped the brush down on the shelf beside her.
"*This* is what I want to talk about!
How bossy you are.
You've been like this ever since we were kids,
and,
and I want it to stop."

With a shock Noxy realized her friend was on the edge of tears.
"Whoa, whoa, whoa," she said,
as if trying to calm a frightened goof.
"I'm not bossy."

"You *are*."
Sensy stamped her foot,
sending water sloshing perilously close to the lip of the tub.
"Rash thinks so too.
It was fine when we were little,
but we're not any more."

Noxy's fingers were digging into her knees hard enough to leave bruises.
For a moment she felt like her whole world was balanced on edge,
ready to tip one way or the other at the slightest nudge.
She forced her hands to relax and crossed her arms,
tracing the letters on her forearm with her thumb,
and let out her breath.

"You're right," she said quietly.
"We're not little any more.
We're old enough to take clouds out by ourselves
and help put out fires
and have someone special to go the fancy with.
I just—"
She blinked,
surprised by the tears in her eyes.
"I just wish sometimes that we were still kids."

"Well, I don't," Sensy said firmly,
her anger disappearing as quickly as it had come.
She picked up the brush and began to scrub her back.
"If we were, Rash wouldn't want to kiss me."

They filled the next few minutes with things simultaneously trivial and important,
like whether Sensy liked his mustache
("No, but he's so proud of it")
and whether they would pair up on the long journey down to the plains
("Are you serious? My *amma* would lock me in the goof pen if she caught us!").
Noxy had almost relaxed by the time Sensy very casually asked,
"So what about you and Thokmay?"

"What about us?"
Noxy tried to keep her tone light.

Sensy pouted.
"Oh come on.
You two were out on Pillow for quite some time."

"With the tiger!" Noxy protested.

"*And* you were just up on the wall with him," Sensy countered.

"With. The. Tiger," Noxy repeated,
putting as much weight behind each word as she could.

"If you say so," Sensy said airily.
"Come on, I'll dry your back if you'll dry mine,
and you can tell me what he's like."

Noxy wanted to say,
"He's the heir to the throne and we were almost buried in a cave-in yesterday,"
just to see if Sensy would take her seriously.
Instead she just shrugged.
"I honestly don't know what he's like.
He's about as easy to read as Kulbinder.
And before you ask,
I think the only thing *he's* interested in is getting out of Stale."

Sensy sighed,
scrubbing Noxy's back with a scratchy gray towel.
"Rash talks that way too."
Noxy relaxed slightly as the conversation shifted back to the safer ground
of Rash's plans to see the world.

She finally managed to escape
after promising to make these baths a regular thing.
Her damp hair chilled as soon as she stepped outside,
but the narrow street was still eerily empty.
She took a left and a right and a deep breath,
and knocked quietly on the back door of the tralpa's house.

When he didn't answer,
she knocked again more loudly.
She had no idea what she'd say if someone saw her.
"I just wanted to see how he was doing," would be about as convincing as,
"I love seeding thimbleberries so much I just *had* to do another bucket."

Luckily,
Yangyal answered this time.
"What do you want?" he snapped,
taking advantage of the single step to look down his nose at her.

"May I come in, honored?"

The tralpa glared at her suspiciously,
then leaned out and made a show of peering both ways.
"I'm actually in the middle of something important," he huffed.
"Come back later."

"Wait."
Noxy put a hand on the door as he began to close it.
"I think you'll want to hear this."

Noxy hadn't been inside the tralpa's house since his arrival in Stale three years earlier.
She had expected it to be as messy as the Scholar-Candidate himself.
Instead,
it was as tidy as Granna Fee's one-room school.
The rug on the floor was simple but clean,
the calligraphy scrolls hanging on the wall were straight and perfectly spaced,
and the only thing she could smell was a faint whiff of ginger.
The only things that seemed out of place were the bottles on his desk.

Yangyal caught her glancing at them and scowled.
"Well?" he asked,
sitting but not offering her a seat.

"I saw you last night," she said,
stuffing her hands in her coat pockets
to stop herself from crossing her arms.
"When you called the lightning, I mean.
I saw you do it."

The tralpa leaned back,
the petulant expression on his face giving way to a colder one.
He had shaved his head that morning,
and his bald pate made him look more than a little like a snapping turtle.
"You know perfectly well I don't have that much power,"
he finally said,
straightening.
"And if this is some kind of prank,
rest assured I will be speaking to your mother about it."

Noxy shook her head.
"I saw you," she repeated.
"And it got me wondering if you could do other things like that.
Because if you can,"
she went on hurriedly as he opened his mouth,
"I think we can help each other."

Five minutes later she was back on the wall,
recounting the conversation to Kulbinder and Thokmay in a low voice.
The tiger's ears lay flat against his skull,
and his tail whipped from side to side.
"Foolish girl," he hissed.
"That was a stupid, needless risk."

"Maybe not,"
Thokmay said thoughtfully.
"Even my father's magicians wouldn't try to get through the forest.
If Sergeant Dorbu and the reeve believe he's suddenly come into his power,
using the bothy as a jail cell would make sense.
And if you volunteer us to be his guards—"

"I don't like it," Kulbinder said emphatically.

Thokmay turned his hands palm up and then palm down
in a lowland gesture that meant, "It's not much, but it's the best I have."
Kulbinder growled instead of snarling,
but made no reply.

"All right," Thokmay said to Noxy.
"What's the first step?"

Noxy smiled,
hoping she looked more confident than she felt.
"The first step is to pick a fight."

</section>
