As I said on Monday, the beginning gripped me. I think I was expecting
something more “The Polar Express” and suddenly I found myself in a
story with Percy Jackson ft. Roald Dahl vibes. I really like the tone
and the (sometimes dark) humor.

I also like the footnotes (they made me laugh a couple times),
although I would review them to decide which ones to keep, because
they make the reader lose focus, and if they are great, it’s worth the
“cognitive effort”; otherwise, they can be an obstacle for the
(otherwise) fast pacing. I noticed this the most in the first chapter,
where I (as the reader) I’m trying to understand what’s going on and
some footnotes made me more confused (not so much the ones about the
characters - it was more the ones about random anecdotes, I would move
them to a point where the reader is more familiar with the world). An
alternative would be to put some of them inline, if they are short.

That was regarding style, but I think it’s related to the main comment
I have about this version. The worldbuilding was confusing for me. It
wasn’t clear to me who the bad guys were and the jumps between
worlds/dimensions forced me to be more focused on keeping up with the
immediate action, which made care less about the long-term conflicts
and goals of Finner - which should be, according to the link you sent
me on Monday, the main theme of the book. I think the new outline
solves part of this by simplifying the action and merging some
scenes/plots.

I like the worldbuilding otherwise: “Every kind of santa that can be,
must be. It’s some kind of quantum thing.” :100: It’s fun and really
colorful in your mind when you picture it (if that makes sense). I
liked both Santa Hood and Santa Greenwood, and Gran-Granna Tumbly
scared me, so well done :clap::skin-tone-2:

Reading the new outline, the motivations and conflicts of Santa Hood
are still not clear to me, though. I understand that she doesn’t
approve of flips, but then, how come she gets along with Santa
Clausbeard (just because of their jobs?)

Other questions regarding the new outline: Who are the members of
Tumbly’s army: robots? What’s her exact mission: capturing flips and
bringing them to The Building? Are all robots made by Subway Santa?
The ending feels a bit rushed/crammed in the outline compared to the
other chapters and it’s not that clear to me, but based on the current
state of the project, I believe it’s temporary until you are convinced
about the previous 90% and probably you’ll be able to develop that in
more detail once that happens :thinking_face:

Apart from that, the outline for Acts 1 and 2 is clear to me and feels
stronger (like cleaner/clearer/more cohesive?) than the “old” outline.

I’m a bit sad about the Santa Claws to Santazilla change
:broken_heart:, but I understand it’s easier if you’re reading out
loud

After writing all of this, I’ve realized that my main issue is the
antagonist. With the new outline, it’s clearer that it’s Tumbly and I
see that she’s antiflip in the description. But why? (I guess this is
something that also applies to our world and I need to live with the
absence of an answer) And how does that translate to actions
(i.e. what does she do with Greenwood and Hood) And why does Greenwood
help her? Just to be close to Hood? If so, I need more background
story about them as a couple and how Tumbly helped them be together. I
think it could be introduced as a current conflict: Greenwood having
second thoughts about his job, wanting to leave Tumbly and bringing it
up to Hood, who “fights back” by asking if this is all related to his
recent “crafty tendencies”.
