## General Ideas

Prayer is prompt engineering for gods.
(Ours cashed out and is on a beach somewhere.)
That's why legacy languages.

The last fireworks show (before everything switches to drones).

Break down the wall of a cellar and find that it's free-standing in the
middle of an enormous cave.

Jellied blood cheese is a delicacy in Uws.

Mirrors in the great halls of Ruuda reflect sunlight everywhere;
initially for defense, but the technology is now exported.

Only the purest dayglass-stored sunlight is effective against the
undead.

Come up with a more refined name for the undead, based on "patchwork".

The four foods in the desert are bread, wine, salt, and dates. In Uws,
chocolate is so precious that it is only drunk at weddings.

A herd of wilkies---big toms (males) and their susans (females).

The wandering screw pine (sends down shoots to propagate itself, so that
it slowly "walks" across the swamp).

Screwthorn and knucklethorn plants.

Gingepper and sharp lime are two spices exported from Barra Bantang.

Juan di Perçalle was a gardener; many reflectories contain elaborate
gardens in different styles; "prayer" consists of asking to be like a
saint (question is, asking who? many people have observed the human
tendency to ask, and consider it a legacy of the Angel Days).

There are railways consisting of bamboo tracks, with carts pulled by
elephants or rhinos.

There are no tides in Cherne, but the water level did drop when Plangent
fell into the sea, and has been sinking very slowly ever since.

Have characters comment on the "chosen one" theme --- it's an
excuse for normal people not to act.

Using vinegar and a wire brush to artificially age oak.

Servants ducking and dodging behind the nobility to hold up their
elaborate cloaks as they dance outdoors.

The theorbo and turlutaine are ancient musical instruments.

Carve a chain out of a single piece of stone, delicately chipping away
until the links are free of one another.

The Ship of All Years is the funeral boat.

Under Uwsian law, men must build their own pyres (or dig their own
graves?) before being executed.

The fishermen of northern Plangentia are very fond of hot spices to
drive away the damp.

The fashion for pottery in southern Plangentia is a simple vase with
clean lines, encrusted with natural-seeming growths (sometimes as
elaborate as entire branches with birds perched on them).

The "game of stones" is Go.

A painter at a reflectory made a mural of the sins and distractions, and
was thoughtful enough to leave space for new ones.

Heliomancy is the art of telling the future by interpreting the dazzle
left in one's eyes by staring at the sun. It exacts its price
automatically...

People who stare into the sun until they're blinded by it as proof of
the strength of their faith. (Garheimmen) Perhaps part of what's
happening in Cherne is that religion is appearing?

Spoons made of clam shells with fitted bone handles.

In Thind, the background figures in a tableau are painted on the wall;
the minor ones are in semi-relief, and the major ones are free-standing
statues. People notice you more if you're a statue, but you also get
crapped on more by the birds.

A scale maker.

The sand gave way to a landscape of black pebbles, left behind by some
broad river of ancient days, covered and uncovered by each change of the
wind.

Merchants loosen the ties on bundles of wool, so that sand will get in
and increase the weight.

"You're running around like a cat with a sock on its head."

Several merchants crept away before dawn, hoping to reach the market
before the rest of the caravan. The others found their bodies in a
gorge, their camels and goods stolen.

A safe-deposit shop (instead of a bank).

Married to the horizon.

Their homes are half-buried; the only entrance is through the smokehole
in the roof.

The killer left two coins to be put on the victim's eyes; in order to
ensure that they wouldn't be stolen, he left them in the victim's
throat.

People's remains are buried in clay ossuaries after the birds have
picked them clean.

A seesaw hat.

As dumb as a house.

It's cold---but at least it's a dry cold.

Cherubs are a kind of bird.

A caravan lost forever in a perpetual storm in the Karaband (the
Wandering Dutchman); it tries to seduce/recruit unwary travelers.

"I lost a few pounds when ill, as one would throw a bone to a wild
animal to keep it at bay."

Manure collectors in the streets.

Loose cobblestones with water trapped between them that shoots up when
they're stepped on. It's particularly disgusting in the fishmarket.

The poor sleep near kilns to keep warm, which makes the bakery, glass,
and brick districts rough places to be after dark.

Tailors have hunched backs, as do silversmiths.

"Every movement that seeks to change society faces two great tasks. The
first is to discredit the old order. The second is to offer a new one.
Without the assurance of a new order, the debate becomes a choice
between order and chaos, and order wins." (William Saletan, in the New
York Times Book Review, Sept 26, 2004)

Fish speckled with luminescent spots to attract prey who are themselves
luminescent dots looking for a school.

Crabs dig shallow holes to hide their shadows on the sand.

Are some animals odorless in order to avoid detection (i.e. as a form of
crypsis)? If so, how would we (humans) know?

The sun used to fly directly over the middle of the world. Now it has
slipped south (actually, the world has tilted), so the north has frozen,
while the south has dried up. The sun doesn't move north or south
through the year; instead, it grows hotter and hotter, day by day, until
midsummer, then cooler until midwinter. It rises white-hot in the east,
and cools through the day to orange-red by evening, so that the
southeast is the hottest part of the world, and the northwest the
coldest. In Garheim, there is a courtyard with one piece of dayglass
tuned exactly to the color of the sun at mid-day on each day of the
year.

...her voice weighted down with a lifetime of asking little, but
getting less.

They believe that the last person to arrive at a funeral will be the
next do die. They know it doesn't usually happen, but that doesn't
stop them believing it.

People keep a chip of stone from the house they're born in as a lucky
charm; hang it around their neck when they're grown.

A "deliverer" is someone who negotiates for the return of hostages
taken during war.

"He's the kind of guy who'd kick a donkey to make it go, then kick it
again 'cuz it wasn't going fast enough, then keep on kicking it
because he'd discovered he liked to."

Cats with their tufts of hair like eyebrows; Piaerre talking to one,
hoping that it will talk back (just like every other kid in Cherne did
at some point); Piaerre overhearing Vurt talking to himself, thinking
that his grandfather is talking to spirits, and only later realizing
that it was just the mutterings of a lonely old man.

Storing knowledge likes bees store honey: workers go out and find it,
bring it back to the hive, but instead of regurgitating honey, they
regurgitate odd facts, which are stored away in honeycomb library cells.

Assassin was turned to stone to sneak him into the palace; stayed that
way for centuries until the spell finally wore off, and found himself in
a world that had changed out of all recognition.

Eimin's bag is reversible: when he buys it, comment in passing on its
plain brown lining, obviously recycled from an older bag. Later, he
reverses the bag and throws off his robe to disguise himself.

"Hive art" is a long, slow art. A man might make twenty or thirty
pieces in a lifetime, starting each when the one before was not even
half finished. The trick is to paint wood with just enough sugar to
attract a few workers, so that you can control their building.

Razi says "eyes what you can" or "ears!", instead of "see what you
can" or "listen!"

Eimin brings Hediyeh back down to the goat pasture, and sends one of the
little girls to Medef for help. There's no investigation or trial;
that's not how villages work, and anyway, everyone can *drome* his
guilt.

Scene after Thomas trades away his interest in women for power: Masika
is available (i.e. shows that she's interested in Eimin). Razi talks
about carrying three books on his travels, and picking which one to read
based on who was nearby (trying to bond with Eimin). Eimin is
embarrassed by the attempt at intimacy. They go out to practice with
swords (blade no wider tha three fingers together, not like pictures in
books at all). Eimin remembers that his first sword was wooden, and felt
heavy. Razi explains that a sword isn't a good weapon for a spy, or a
thief: it's too big, and besides, real soldiers have more practice with
them anyway. Important to get across Razi's feeling of duty: this is
what our people need from us, this is what we can do for them, perhaps
this is why we're born *nif*. (Foreshadow insinuation that maybe being
*nif* isn't accidental.) Reveal in this scene that Eimin's parents are
separated (split when he was seven). Don't make a big deal of it at
this point...

Eimin is offered magic by his host, but Aphsi don't do magic---don't
have enough fire in their bellies.

Pawns in chess can become important just by being the focus of
attention. The pawn itself doesn't matter, or the location, it's just
where both sides are building up their strength.

Put dried plums in meat to slow down spoiling.

A blue-headed duck.

The *Wonderfish*.

A small, round clay flute called an ocarina.

A calligrapher's assistant working next door to a pewtersmith.

The red veins in rosewood.

The end of the monastery jutted out on a spur of rock like the prow of a
ship.

Each wave has its own name; they are born and die every instant. It may
seem short and pointless, but what are we to trees, or trees to the
mountains?

People cleaning a floor, and the boss says, "Start in the corners."
It's harder, and people complain, but when they make mistakes and
scratch things, the scratches are out of the way.

Story starts with the boy's mother saying, "Oh, I wish you knew how
much I love you," as she send him off to school for three years. He
starts to cry and says, "I wish I did too," then adds to the reader,
"But of course that was the whole problem. I couldn't." Then explain
droming and being snel. (His parents are travelling --- one year to
cross the Glasslands, a few weeks of work, then the long wait to travel
back in the windless season.) While he's at the school, a master thief
tries to persuade him that he has special powers that he doesn't know
about. She starts by talking about how one day people will be able to
fly, without magic or clouds or dragons to ride on. When the boy scoffs,
she says, "But people didn't used to know how to swim. They would have
thought it was magical, that someone could go into the water and not
drown. Imagine how much courage that took. Imagine what the world would
be like if someone had learned, and then decided that no-one else should
know. It would be as if someone had learned how to teach everyone to
drome, then decided not to." The thief is trying to presuade him to
steal some old books and tools from the school; she doesn't outright
tell the boy that he has special powers (that would be too obvious), but
instead says that the only way to find out is to get the stuff and try.

A breeze came up, and for a moment she thought the swaying branches of
the trees were waving goodbye, but then she pushed the thought out of
her head. It was a crazy thought, and she wasn't crazy any more.

"A Popsicle for the King" --- a story about two of the cloudherds
taking ice to the capital for the king's birthday present?

She woke up on her wedding day and burst into tears, because her
grandmother and her aunts had stayed up all night sewing fresh rose
petals onto her wedding dress.

"Just because they can sense that you're hurt doesn't mean they
won't hurt you --- some people learn to savor the pain of their
enemies the way other people savor the smell of strong cheese."

He remembers being stabbed in the belly, and wanting to run away from
the pain, or shake it off, as if it were an animal biting him or someone
wrestling him.

Man counting sheep --- comes up with nine or ten because he has
counted some several times. Try to explain, "But that's not right, you
can only count each sheep once," and he asks, "Why?"

Remove Tzen Ma from "The Last Wolf", and have only one undead
character (the Wrestler); is he trying to destroy himself, or is the
shaman doing it? Lara challenges Evan's peacemaking role: "What would
you have done about Prince George?" Still need to work in the last
wolf; what's her role?

Everyone takes off their boots, then tucks their laces into the boot
tops to keep them dry.

His humor had grown dark and bitter, like tea that had steeped too
long...

One little fact stuck in his mind like a raspberry seed between his back
teeth.

Epiphyte: seed falls on a fungus that is parasitizing a tree, and
consumes the fungus (but not too quickly, because that would also kill
the epiphyte). Shoots hang down to find other fungi; it's a slow
wrestling match. Some epiphytes re-root themselves over and over again,
walking through the forest in slow motion, a lifetime at a step.
Epiphytes are trees' friends, but would disappear if the fungi they
consume disappeared, so they are never too efficient...

A battle called Harald's Lesson...

Sawgrass.

Blood is dark green under water.

Someone who has grown up undersea would think that birds were like quick
fish.

Floating upside down and backward makes you feel like you're flying
over the moon, like the first Apollo astronauts.

The Bellringers tried to control time by making clocks that make all
days the same length. Joke about everyone getting up at the same time,
no matter who they were. It's unnatural, and made everyone feel tired
all the time...

The Admirals' Game (one five, two fours --- what to use instead of
mines?). It's like chess, but more like real life, because you can't
see what the piece's strength is until you meet it.

Those who can "hear" refer to people who can't as "garbage",
because they "smell" (i.e. their emotions are always evident). It's
very rude...

He worked in the ivory mines (a graveyard of ancient creatures).

There's another, old, chunky boy who's also "deaf". He's been
selected to become the clan's butcher. He has always tormented the
protagonist, just as he's tormented other children (or tried to ---
they can get away from him, because they can "hear" him coming ---
the protagonist is selected for training because he's taught himself
how to be unnoticeable). When the protagonist is selected, the older boy
is angry and almost tearful: now he really is alone. The protagonist
feels guilty, and says, "I'll come back and get you, and we can go
away somewhere," even though they've never really been friends. The
older boy says, "No you won't, no you won't," and runs away on the
verge of tears. Later, the protagonist hears that the older boy has
"fallen" off one of the spires. He starts to ask, "What was he doing
up there?" but then he realizes that no-one ever goes up there to play
(it was suicide).

End a chapter with the child injured. Start the next with, "He must
have fallen asleep, although he didn't really remember waking. The
light was different --- clearer, somehow, as though everything was
transparent, although it wasn't." It takes the reader a few moments to
realize that the boy is dead.

Parents love their "deaf" children, but since they can't "hear"
their parents' soothing thoughts, they cry a lot, and are very trying,
so they are sent to be raised by one of the old women (it's an
established role in the clan). The protagonist therefore starts life
feeling rejected.

Discussions with the old woman are like therapy: she can tell when the
boy is lying, so she gently says, "But that's not true, is it?"
whenever he tries to fudge a point. Has to be clear that it's not
really for his benefit, but for the benefit of those who can "hear":
he's being trained to control his emotions, and not to let his ache
show.

Scene in the city where an old woman needs a seat on the ferry boat, and
the young girls won't get up to give her one, and then she falls when
the boat stumbles. The old woman hurts herself, and as the protagonist
is helping her up, the old woman says, "I'm sorry, I'm sorry," in a
miserable voice. The protagonist sits down beside his teacher, and then
says out loud, "I want to hurt them," just as if he was back with the
old woman. He speaks as if he and his teacher were the only ones in the
boat. "I want to hurt them. That old woman --- they could have stood
up, and given her a seat, and then she's apologizing when she falls
down. It wouldn't have been a big thing to let an old woman rest for a
few moments, but all they can think about is that she has wrinkles and
her hair's thinning and no-one can make them stand up. I want to throw
my tea in their faces, or hurt them so that they'll learn better." The
girls have gone pale with fear, but the protagonist's teacher calmly
says, "But that won't make them any better than they are, will it? You
could do all that, and they still wouldn't see how ugly they are
inside. They still wouldn't understand that you get up to give an old
woman a seat because it's the right thing to do, not because it's a
rule or because people make you. If you hurt them, all they will learn
is that sometimes people hit you and you can't hit back. That will be
what they each their children, so their children will grow up to be just
as ugly as they are."

The protagonist explaining that he sometimes dreams about rescuing
someone from drowning. (He's never seen someone drown, but he has read
about it --- talk about him imagining what it would be like to swim.)
His teacher says, "Then you're not really imagining doing good, are
you? Because if you wanted to imagine doing good, you'd imagine
preventing someone from drowning. What you're imagining is being seen
as a hero."

Looking at a man with ragged teeth, wondering what it would feel like to
run a tongue over them from the inside, whether you'd get used to it
and stop noticing, or whether you would just never have noticed.

Replacing bones with diamond glass.

Long Ash, Ash Mock, the Ash Hand (dwarf place names).

"Different people believe a lot of different things happen to us when
we die. We believe that you have to tell your story --- your whole
life's story --- before you can move on. Telling it to the village
rememberer is just a way of practicing. It doesn't have to be an
exciting story. It doesn't have to have lots of rescues and daring
escapes. But it ought to mean something to you. It ought to be a story
you want to hear again, one that you'll enjoy, because what would be
the point of having a life that even you didn't want to hear about?"

Shaking off the dregs of his dream.

Little whispers of smoke.

"You can spend your whole life being angry. You can be thirty years
old, and still daydream about somehow waking up knowing kung-fu when you
were twelve and giving the bully who used to shove you around in the
playground some of his own back. You can have angry conversations with
the mirror, or in the shower, when you're all alone, every single day
from now until you die. Or you can let it go. It's up to you. No-one
will choose for you. No-one can make you do it. It's up to you."

"There's monsters out there, boy. There's cobble haunts and ghouls
that'll rend you to shreds just for the smell of you. Me and mine are
all that keeps them out the door, and we *will* keep them out whether
you feed us or no, whether you give us a bed or no, but god's love on
this earth, I don't think a pint and a chew of bread is asking more
than's fair."

Man who built a little house on a hill so that he could watch the slow
decay of the mansion he'd grown up in.

The "villain" is a man whose only child was killed accidentally (just
stepped out in front of a carriage, nobody's fault, just a moment in
time). Not a moment has gone by since when he hasn't heard the sound of
the carriage wheels. His wife grieved herself into an early grave: would
burst into tears at random moments, and finally just gave up. Now he
wants to make that moment never have happened. "Even if I can't bring
my son back, I just want it to have never been." The problem is that if
that moment disappears, then everyone loses continuity. Nothing else
will change, but we won't be who we were before that moment. Our
stories won't be stories about *us*, but about people with the same
names and faces. Our memories will still all be there, but they won't
be *our* memories, they'll be stories that someone else told us. It's
the difference between having the bowl you grew up with, and having an
identical bowl that was someone else's.

Bubbles from the Royal Birthday Party that were enchanted so that they
would never pop --- still find them in corners, or blowing around the
city, and she wonders whether they'll become objects of wonder in
far-away lands, and whether the magic items in the castle were once
someone's birthday present.

The Truth Mines and the Pebble Factory.

Feeding dyed grains to birds to give them color.

The Scour is the wind that blows across the glass; scour is the grit
that it blows up into people's faces (need goggles to protect eyes). A
scourboat is a lightweight wheeled cart with sails.

"The deeper the weed, the brighter it grows." People live in the
valleys formed in the cracks in the glass; water is channeled into
brackish lakes, unless it can find an outlet, or evaporate quickly
enough.

He shows up unshaven; the aunt says rather tartly, "I suppose personal
grooming isn't so important to some people," and he replies, "Less
important than good manners," then holds her gaze until she colors and
looks away. Need a later scene where the guy's girlfriend says,
half-admiring, half-scolding, "I can't believe you said that! I never
think of things like that until it's too late!" He replies, "Maybe
that's why you have more friends than I do."

Sea water in the north becomes viscous, like mercury, as it approaches
freezing.

A Carnival of Hammers.

Prince wearing four ribbons, on legs as well as arms, now that he's a
cavalry officer. (On legs so that infantry can see more clearly.)

Need a fast ship to come down the sound before word of the voyage can
travel.

Magician with the power to understand what the wind is saying. Some
breezes sigh, "Lost... lost...", while some storms are blustering,
bragging bullies.

Thoughts sprouted in his head like weeds.

All the different kinds of white in an iceberg, and all the colors that
seemed forever ready to burst out of the white, but never quite did.

Add a kite-flying scene to "Tornado", and another to "Wolf" ---
some things should be done one last time, knowing that it's the last
time.

A plump girl who loves the feeling of ribbons in her hands, and loves to
play with the ends of brightly-colored threads, imagining them dancing
like willow-graceful ladies, twirling around at a ball, with candles in
glass lanterns and an orchestra and a polished tile floor beneath a
chandelier. Her father sits in his chair, an empty teacup going cool in
his lap, imagining all the great speeches he'll never give, the calls
to arms and denunciations of injustice and noble, self-sacrificing
farewells.

Red snow (seeds blown into it, year after year).

"Lamping" (lighting a small fire, then shooting the animals that come
to investigate it).

No danger of clouds freezing when they go north in "Wolf"; they're
used to the mountains.

Metal smoking condensation when it's brought indoors.

Married couple has to leave the village for a few days, so that everyone
can re-decorate the house that they are to share. Often do this before
the wedding (which sometimes leads to weddings being cancelled, but
that's not necessarily a bad thing either).

This year's law (the assembly only passes one per year).

The boy asks the tinsmith why he isn't married, and taps a vein of
sadness. It wasn't that there was someone, long ago, it's that there
was many people who were not quite right, or maybe he was hoping that
someone better would come along, and kept hoping, and always managed to
find fault with those who were available, until he discovered that he
had walled up that part of himself so well to guard against loneliness
that he couldn't find his way back in even if he wanted to. His
friendship with the boy is an attempt to sneak into that place.

One mosquito is an annoyance, but a hundred is something that you just
have to put up with. (Allegory about bandits: one is hunted down, but
large numbers are treated as a fact of life.)

The tribe's eulogist must learn everyone's life, so that s/he can lead
a proper funeral service. When the 'deaf' boy is to be sent away, the
first he knows is when the eulogist gently tells him that he no longer
needs to make his weekly visit (like confession).

The fact that they can sense people's emotions doesn't make them any
nicer, just subtler. (Correct the misconception that outsiders have in
imagining that empathy will create a perfect society: does living in a
rich land make you all charitable?)

Events erode the future, or shake it up, in the way that rivers and
earthquakes erode and shake up a landscape.

"I've had my ache of widows..." (Make the language in "Clouds" and
other novels slightly strange to the ear...)

"A wolf is kept fed by his feet."

The rents are low in hell.

The moon is a faded blue color, or "As blue as the moon," or "She had
moon-blue eyes."

The Bellmakers toil in silence, so that when the bell first speaks, it
will speak with its own voice. Each bell is then named according to the
prophecy it made.

Observatories take the place of cathedrals; the Garheimmen have very
good calendars.

The ritual of nicking the throat of the oldest man present at the start
of the fall slaughter of sheep.

The official palace thief.

Fear tastes like a rusty knife.

Islands rising out of the sea like mountain peaks rising out of the
clouds (and then later reverse the image).

Bloodfish.

A small tarn that a glacier had scraped out when it curled up and slept
for a few thousand years.

Sailors see a man standing on the ocean, bobbing gently up and down as
the waves rise and fall beneath his feet. (Travels by standing on the
leading edge of a wave and letting it push him.)

Ruby trees (plant 'em, their roots go way down and pull up gemstones.)

"May your fields be full of plowbane."

He grumbled, but built a stand so that Gram wouldn't have to bend over
to tie up her shoes.

"Babiest"

The prince's grandfather was called "Deaf King Edward", because he
never took advice from anyone.

"That's like asking which side of the coin is the 'real' one."

He was always willing to say, "I'm at fault," but it was always
followed immediately by "but" or "however".

Nosewax

The crown of Ini Bantang is cursed: whoever wears it can never be
satisfied with what they have or what they do. Of course, anyone who
thinks the crown is worth wearing is probably already cursed in that
way...

Volcanos are used to forge replacement parts for the Universal
Mechanism. People complain about having to suffer the effects of
accidents (i.e. eruptions), but the dwarves reply that it's an
unavoidable cost. (Analogy with nuclear power and other issues.)

When re-doing "Clouds" with older children, make it explicit that
puberty brings on mind-speech.

In cultures that only occasionally see clouds, "riding a cloud" means
"living in a dream". Even further away, it means "being drugged".

You have to keep good luck in motion: if you try to hang onto it, it'll
turn sour.

The breeze blows uphill in the morning, and down in the evening, as if
the mountain tops were inhaling and exhaling once a day.

The king is a carpenter, and Prince Evan is a kitemaker, while his
brother rides. (Some comment about nobles trying to learn one skill or
the other depending on who's in favor.)

Pikas and Pinemartens (a board game).

Mention the weather a lot more: skies, temperature, wind, how quickly
the mountains cool off, and how warm the plains stay in summer even
after the sun has gone down.

Mention the soldier dolls outside each home in Apple Bridge.

The difference between the pine needles of the mountains, and the broad
leaves of the trees on the plains, is that the former are a lot tougher.
"Aye," says Sergeant Crimes, "But the wood is softer."

Taiga (boreal forest).

Fallen trees act as dams, creating small pools.

The Anuat mistrust the Garheimmen language. In Anuat, there is no way to
say, "It is raining," because there is no "it". They believe that
Garheimmen was invented so that people could duck responsibility.

Anuat word for Garheimmen ships means "wooden whale".

"I could write and write and write, and to these people I'd still be
the little boy who always picked his nose in class."

If "Clouds" is re-written, then use the beast that the wizard's
mother defeated, rather than lightnings (because the latter violate the
proscription of using clouds and others as weapons).

"White blood".

Wattenaska is a Dantiwaw name (someone confuses it with Anuat).

So rich that he didn't care if others were.

A card game called Ducky Ace.

The Bridge of Dead Princesses, the Apparent Bridge (so-called because
it's apparently never finished).

"All men shall be sailors until the sea shall free them."

The prince feels that he's letting people down: his father by giving up
the throne, Sgt. Crimes, etc.

"You'll be grease!"

Nailsmith Road

"Blood spills faster than water."

People keep the same formal names, generation after generation, so that
the dwarves can remember them.

Need to drop hints in "Blizzard" about the magic mirror before it gets
used --- it should show things that aren't there, or something.

The prince is studying lists of mythical beasts (i.e. ones which are
naturally magical) --- a "coatl" is a two-headed serpent found in
tropical deserts.

Eyebrows like puffs of smoke.

Last Laugh says that people believe there are wolves left in hiding
because they want to believe it --- they feel guilty.

Show soldiers collecting taxes at the edges of Apple Bridge --- tax
collectors are referred to as "the King's Appetite", or as "the
King's Need".

"How much for a drink?" "A penny, but refills are free." "Well, in
that case, I'll just have a refill..."

Painted lynx (patchwork fur like a tabby cat), whippingdills (type of
bird), a tangling shrub called blind man's vengeance, and mumblefish.

Holding the cereal bowl with one arm wrapped around it as if to guard it
from hungry siblings.

Wizard traded for the power to only speak the truth, and became mute as
a result.

Trading mercy and pity to reinforce single-minded zealotry.

For Blizzard: the Balance says that in some cultures, important people
decorate their clothes with bells so that everyone can hear them coming,
while in other cultures, tinkers and traders do the same thing to
attract attention. This obviously causes a lot of confusion, and jokes.
(Commenting on the differences between the way the prince is acting, and
the way Lara is expecting him to act.)

Add a game of kabbadi to Tornado to show the prince in officer role (and
to echo the fencing lesson in Clouds).

Add a scene in which Lara shows off her umbrella. The prince has never
seen one before, and makes fun of it, but pretty soon all of the women
in town are carrying them.

A turtle encrusted with gemstones.

Teaching the doors to recognize newcomers.

The East pole (where the sun rises) is also called the Glasslands,
because the rock has been baked and melted.

Tattoos that writhe and twist on a man's arm.

Orwell lists six rules "that one can rely on when instinct fails."
These rules were not written with literary or scientific language in
mind, but with the everyday need to foster language "as an instrument
for expressing and not for concealing or preventing thought."

"they fought like two grapes"

biting the juicy berry off the back of a grape, then watching it scuttle
away

siege of Summer House (so called because the besieger had prisoners
built a cottage, then packed them into it and burned them alive)

time measured BPE (Before the Pluralization of Emperor) and APE
- old man asking "But how could it be the year *before*
  something?"
- doesn't believe in negative numbers, either (scholarly debate)
- if you don't have many debts, you are rich: negative times negative
  is positive

"your father has taken news of victory to your grandfather"
- at first appears to be a metaphor for having died later discover it's the literal truth

boots with tie-on soles (what would wear them out)?

"they put their dead in the earth" (repugnant)

an old man with one horn broken off, the stump still uneven and dirty,
- his eyes half-full of soft, sticky, semi-translucent rheum

build small alcoves and round windows (different types of birds) in the
courtyart wall for birds to nest
- but have runways so that cats can be allowed up every once in a
  while to encourage the birds to fly away
- "of course it's open to view: what would decent people have to
  hide?"

"a gabler by profession"

the Street of All Canals and the Canal Beneath All Streets do not cross

official and unofficial rumors

stuffed dummy standing guard at entrance to house

rich houses have hollow statues filled with straw; poor houses just have puppets

a wind goose on the roof

constitution of neighbouring state has elected lower house, and upper
house of nobles (latter kept power by refusing to choose a king)

tongue at the top of each building for pulley (used to be lifting goods
into shops, now lifting furniture into houses)

must turn the soil each year to keep claim on the land
- sufficient now to plough a line around it
- or just to put a spade into a corner
- but every house keeps a small patch of the original earth in a jar

myth: flower and stem of plant are poison and specific antidote

inheriting a self (long stories about "previous lives") in priesthood

the priest: "all I do is balance the scales at this moment in your
life"

talk about "years" instead of months

"children, some as young as sixty"
"night" and "day" for winter and summer

trace the history of a building, and its uses over time

"there is no love, only need"

lots of little panes of glass in the windows (easier to replace after
riot)

birds sitting together on the window sills of a building

one keeping a lot of space by attacking any other that comes near

the "deaf frogs" experiment

Death is a cranky old tree

trees migrating

herders use slow fires to encourage them to move
trick is not to make the fire so hot that the tree retreats into
  itself

boots with decorated soles (for sitting in)

people injure themselves with home endoscopes

wireless permanent internal endoscope

war vets with senses ripped out, kids who've grown up with implants

"He was the sort of man who would keep a rare African slug as a pet."

"Who said that, Chandler?"

"Don't call it fiction; call it 'statistics'."

fuss over room booking ("but we always have this room") with Matthew
Morley in Edinburgh

being angry, even years later, for not having stood up

guy marking off calendar in advance, claiming to do it in order to
confuse future archaeologists

watching "Dead Poets' Society" over and over again

his frown created a small vertical roll of flesh between his eyebrows

programmers laugh when someone farts (particularly if he leans over and
does it obviously, but not loudly)

being passed by a recliner bike at night in a narrow street

technology being used in strange ways --- umbrella lampshade.

putting paper clips on shirt pockets.

"I want to live in a world where the villains always give the heroes
good lines."

"I used to dream of knee-capping God, but I've settled for this."

Giddy with grief.

The Turkish fast-food cook who never touched the food directly with his
left hand.

BLZ: bacon, lettuce, and zucchini

roots are there to suck up sustenance; they shouldn't hold us in place,
and we shouldn't go digging around them all the time.

chaining bike to desk: "If you're afraid of someone stealing the desk,
there are better ways..."

the London Escalator Virus (why all the escalators don't work).

met her at the museum, when she was drawing, copying out calligraphic
curls from an Arabic manuscipt.

a half-finished statue, with bits of wire sticking through the plaster.
Just is....

Leonardo da Vinci's sketches --- designing, not describing.

"I'll make this short and sweet." (reply) "Why not just short?"

a mouthful of crazy glue.

urban paranoia --- someone else is getting all the green lights.

sitting in the subway, seeing a frisbee come sailing through the window,
at the next stop some tourists come in and pick it up

the innocent not knowing to look for the lights when he's stoned.

"He always thinks he can do a better job, even if he never actually
has."

somebody had changed the sign from "Beer Patio" to "Beer Ratio".

shoelace caught in the escalator; child in a panic

hot water instead of tea.

the kind of guy who would tell the tourists the wrong directions rather
than admit ignorance

getting into trousers much too stylish for him, saying, "Is this some
kind of cruel joke?"

considerate enough to put record collection out in public so that
visitors would have something to discuss.

dense yellow (the colour of raincoats)

a programmer coming in and stripping down --- wallet out, watch off,
sweatshirt onto the back of the chair.

another programmer who puts his pens on top of the keyboard.

"Ought to get a notebook and write these down" (said time after time)

"You've got to decide whether you're going to complain about people
who talk about ideological issues, and talk about them without being
ashamed yourself, or not."

I feel like a citizen of one of those small towns Clint Eastwood rides
into. Everything has changed, but there's no sign of change, or the
changer.

thin cellophane bags for bread which always tear open.

A girl in a long skirt with slits on the sides up to knee height, and
boots that stop just short of the knee, so that every few steps there's
a flash of leg. Not much, but suddenly feel very aware of loneliness.

The kind of guy who never learns the names of the food in Indian
restaurants because the menu always has subtitles.

"You know what Marx said about blah blah." "Yes, I do, and I don't
care." Later, when asked, he says, "Oh, I haven't a clue what Marx
said, I just wasn't going to admit that to him."

Rumour has it that he woke up one morning to find he'd stuck his tongue
up his own ass.

"You argue for the hell of it. You don't really believe in anything."
"That's not true. I believe in lots. I'm just not sure what."

Bicycle repair classes --- buy your own tire at the outset, watch it
slowly fall to pieces as you puncture it, tear it, put it on the rim and
take it off again...

"I'm actually a very garrulous guy. I haven't had a garl in years."

keep change wrapped up in a handkerchief.

man with two pairs of glasses on a string around his neck.

Getting tired of Edinburgh on the night that two separate bunches of
lads threatened me.

being on a cycle waiting for the lights to change, noticing the kids in
the car beside him watching him, smiling at them and starting to rock
back and forth, like I want to race.

a couple walking down the street, she's pushing a bike and they're
holding hands.

Scene where guy goes up behind girl, kisses her neck, hugs her, says,
"I'm going to do some laundry. You have anything you want done?"
"Yes, stuff under bed." (brief) Moment later guy comes back in, same
ritual. "How do I do the white blouse? Cold water, hang it to dry?"
"Yes." girl sighs, puts down brush, turns around. "You don't have to
make a big deal of it. I'll love you even if you don't do the
laundry." guy is hurt, confused, doesn't expect or know how to respond
to this 'attack'.

street musicians in tunnels beneath streets of Moscow. "I was the
first. Made a permit for myself and stuck it to my guitar case. No-one
ever knew it was not real."

awake late one night sees light across street. Man naked at desk
writing. After a few minutes a woman in a nightgown comes over,
obviously sleepy. Puts arms around him. He keeps writing for a couple of
minutes, puts pen down, turns sideways. She sits in his lap, they hold
each other for a long while, then get up and turn out light. Feel very
alone.

people often become political to avoid loneliness

going to a restaurant, booking a table, and having another party of the
same number of people show up with the same name (like at Mamma's in
October 1988).

skim of ice on the canals like the skin on tomato soup that's gone cold

lots of tourists (often hand-holding couples)

mark on forehead is the footprint of God (Naipaul)

make a bowl out of one's own two feet

building leaning together because supports have rotted

man hangs pictures in his office of people who died because of a bug in
some code he wrote (not sure that was the cause)

gets very angry when people break his coding standards

"I'll be old and fat like Three Boots the cat, and they'll use it
[the roof hook used for furniture] to lift me up to the roof for the
Festival, and that's why it's called a granny hook"

"the mountain spread its branches" (can talk about someone running
through the mountains --- use "mountain" for normal "tree")

subway train not opening its doors, and driver not caring (Toronto at
Xmas)

little dog barking at puppet in the street in Bruges

dramatic scene in play: "A duel! Certainly! And our weapons shall be
--- the truth!" (and then ruin the man with things he's done)

a "charcoalerie" (foreign guess at barbecue)

"I don't know brand names, and I don't have to care"

supervisor yelling at student for ripping him off, using up space to
store pictures, deleting all non-work stuff (but after having backed it
up)

Jo's story about the old woman in the toilet in China, wanting to trade
places with her

the many uses of an umbrella (point, gesture, clear a path)

pictures made of layers of coloured paper, carefully cut in relief

spy window low on canal side of tower to look at passing boats

hanging on to outside of car down long, gentle incline (getting stopped
by police)

one coarse, tough hair in an eyebrow

"she was eaten by a mouse"

argument about whether chess is gambling, and, even if not, whether it
is permitted on a pilgrimage

overhear two girls talking in a mall: "he wanted to be more than just a
stepfather, you know?"

make sure you go the toilet on the plane --- last clean one for a
while

vaguely remember reading that chess positions were used as a code during
the war

toy ducks dumped into river, children watching

"He had too much learning, and even more opinion"

trying to cram too much into a holiday, travelling all the time

floor of the church is a riot of different-coloured tiles

"talking statues" in political campaigns (hang posters around their
necks)

the Long Gate (really a narrow street between walls)

swords always smaller than expected

tilt your head back and look in the mirror for fatigue darkening under
your eyes

argument between serving an idea and serving an immortal

artist getting into trouble for doing depth-paper portrait and using an
extra leaf for the subject's nose

"they stretch their words, or cut them to keep a rhythm" (explain by
marching in place) --- "it's not real poetry at all"

"he hangs his meat an extra day --- he *likes* the gamey taste"

come out to find the bicycle seat wet because you forgot to put your
plastic bag on it (put the bag on the damp seat)

like a doorstop jammed under a table leg --- problem isn't cured, but
sits straight enough

a key that no-one can remember a use for, but no-one is willing to throw
away

the sky narrowed by roofs

a mythical animal that runs itself to death in grief when its mate dies

"He lost the battle because he was not content with victory, but
demanded instead a rout"

roosting birds like strange black fruit

"Steak Out" restaurant

coloured pom-poms on uniform to show rank

the sons of the rich all go into the theater as preparation for public
life

snails infected with a certain parasite are considered a delicacy

see spiders, rather than bees, as symbols of industry

make a living collecting shellac from trees

when boarding aircraft, wait until final call --- why bother to queue?

"Bell Week and World" (children's game)

use different numbers to count cattle, so that spirits won't overhear

"I should write an essay on what I've learned from being a
programmer"

erosion of paving stones leaves hard veins of marble sticking up to snag
unway toes

"he would have unhinged his jaw like a snake to swallow it all"

the first letter he got from her had crushed petals in it

"cheek-kissing club" (merchant's cartel that takes care of newcomers
to city)

never grow just a moustache --- always grow a beard, then shave

"he dances like a test pilot --- always needing control, always
pushing the envelope"

rejoinder: "that's the flakiest Chandlerism I've ever heard you
  make"
counter: "Who's Chandler?" (but we know he already knows)

uncle slurping soup out of bowl to amuse kids

bus steamed up on a cold day

"I shall play the innocent, and trust him at his word. If he suffers
for it, well then, *I* shall not be damned."

wrapping apples while still on the tree

an alarm that won't stop ringing for a whole weekend (like the
Springsteen tape that was on permanent re-play)

bas-relief grave markers that always have an unbroken chain from the
ground up to heaven (woman reaching flowers to bird superimposed on
rainbow to cloud)

oil container supposed to look like mouse (actually resembles one of the
more obscure internal organs)

put ghouls on tombstones to frighten the dead if they try to rise

decorate the *inside* of the coffin

mad emperor who knocked the noses off statues of his father

debate: the Plural Emperor's members can always shift blame to each
other

better or worse at morality than a single man?

tombstone of person (small) under guard of god (large)

women of authority wear false beard, and a sash stiffened to resemble a
sword

tombstone that no-one understands (small figure in corner waving
goodbye)

irisation of glass (moisture causes flaking, leads to rainbows)

very valuable

civilization built on ruins of older city

icons made by baking gold-based paint between two sheets of glass

a city called "Thirty"

bird getting angry at the sound of its own echo

a day when the wind blows but the sun shines

too cold with jacket open, too warm with it closed

moustache hairs getting caught in tab on drink can

Saniya's joke about henna and elections (green going in, red coming
out)

sneezing onto computer screen (little smeared droplets on glass, don't
wipe off easily)

porno Tetris

cutt off earlobes to make oneself more attractive

nostrils like armpits

re-telling stories to make the past bearable

never speak of "ten to five", always "after ten is five"

former smacks of wizardry

a contrary sort of person --- as soon as you complain about the train
being late, s/he will excuse it

staring down the woman on the subway train in London

starting a conversation over de Beauvoir on the train to Bristol

line about father carrying several books to impress different people

guy talking about the way mucous gloops down the back of your throat,
and then has to be swallowed

girl says "that's not funny, and it doesn't make me laugh or turn
  me on, it just costs you points"
being all grown up because she's pissed off already
but thought something gross he said earlier was funny

joke about the Poles: "whenever one looks like he's getting out, the
others pull him back in"

dissection as a political act

giving your body to the doctors is an affirmation of secularism

Mickey Mouse suntan

raisin sandwich

American women sound twelve years old, European women sound bored

old man doing deft surgery on an orange and popping the quarters into
his mouth

"like comparing oranges and grapefruit"

he was half-seated against the desk, being fellated by a small blonde
girl with a plump face, when the phone rang --- he woke up on the
second ring, and forgot his dream immediately

one of those clever ethnic toys with levers and gears that do unexpected
things

"SOB" = Simple Operating System Kernel (blank acronym, like blank
verse)

sea-going people move inland, put boat tie-up rings on the walls of
their houses and use them for horses, still decorate with naval motifs

load luggage into the bus bay, then wait in the rain until it's closed
(afraid that someone will steal the luggage)

"his money had more tin than gold, and more milk than either"

first symptom of disease is hard bumps on kneecaps and shoulderblades

"the Other Eight Legs": if spider is symbol of hard work, octopus is
symbol of secret service

have a very brief surreal chapter on being tortured

birdcage out on a balcony taking up the whole balcony

old man chattering about history, throws in a spurious "no relation"
when naming someone

dog pissing on clothing hanging at outdoor stall, no-one noticing

a portrait painter who paints copies of portraits of famous people to
decorate merchants' homes, and touches up portraits of ancestors to
make them look more modern (good sales line arguing for it)

brushing moustache out of the way with the tip of his tongue

people who hum their own particular hymn tune all day, every day; when
two or more meet, they start singing together

wearing new class t-shirt on top of plaid shirt in classroom

"your wife, under pretence of keeping a bawdy house, is a receiver of
stolen goods" (Johnson)

"the Mumblese ambassador is speaking in her native tongue"

tortoise with sail on its back (symbolizes what?)

half-finished Michelangelo sculpture

even great artists insist on being paid

steps worn by a waterfall of feet

"fresh cutlery for every course" (a sign of wealth)

"when he first brought the new medicine, his walk as a physician ran
from the river to the edge of the city"

"the rest of the band persuaded him to play bodhran as he sang so that
he'd have something to do with his hands"

all manner of banners hanging across the street: politics, payers, shop
advertising

like stopping one hole in a sieve

PMT due as much to loss of sleep as anything else

makes a woman cranky because she needs more at that time

Parliament chamber with walkway overhead on which guards tramp back and
forth, their boots echoing

cabinet with mother-of-pearl inlay of wonderful scenes

in one corner, hardly noticeable, a man is flying

unexpected taste of mustard on Ethiopian food

"many of us are here already, Earthling"

swapping different pound notes in Edinburgh as the tour guide looks on
smugly

young soldier very firm that he *shouldn't* have slept in another
room while escorting a young noblewoman home

"in a reputable hostel, of course, but among these people? am I to
  trust an innkeeper not known to me?"

"maps of the unknown"

build a church by stacking graves on top of one another, one by one,
until walls completed, then start the next

the Canadian National Sponge Team

"he fought in the War of Union to take us into the Triple Kingdom, and
then ten years later in the War of Secession to take us out"

snuffing out match by licking thumb and forefinger and pinching

get head of match caught on skin and burnt

king arrives, demands wagons listed by assessors, merchant can't
produce them (has been skimming)

king asks another merchant, how much for your wagons?
merchant names an exorbitant price, king agrees and then sequesters
  house of first merchant to pay for it
asks a second merchant for his wagons as well, second merchant names
  a ridiculously low price
calmly, in face of king's anger, says "We have kings, but we do
  not love them"

no-one actually perches castles on cliffsides, they'd fall down

traveller mistakes outlying suburb for city proper

guide smiles kindly --- everyone does that

masked rider claiming to have the plague in order to be left alone

man writing letters to his wife

"oh, she's been dead for five years now"
will have letters buried with him, even though wife was illiterate
firmly: "she will have learned to read in Heaven"

town families competing to build highest tower

one man waited until neighbours' tower was almost finished, then
  brought in masons from neighbouring town overnight to add to his own
  to make it taller

the game is played on two boards

in each turn, player may choose which board to move on
game is asymmetric, but each player has one of each position

"it is my duty to die first"

trying to get picture taken with local man, as if he was part of the
scenery

Rent-a-Life

screwing for dollars (radio DJ's scam)

"Heaven is a place..." joke

"why the Swiss as lovers? because you can't hit on the British
  twice"

"may the Lord take your circumstances into account"

architecture like a child god's scattered toys

theatre troupe is just a vehicle for his political ambitions

three grey feathers instead of three falcons as insignia for family
  in play

"you got a $50 head, you wear a $50 helmet"

a coat made from a tartan blanket with the fringe still on

"spontaneous privatization" (theft)

measure the length of his new jacket with a pikestaff

"it is better to be kicked by a cow that gives milk that by one which
does not"

his body was like a piece of scurrilous verse scrawled on a lavatory
wall

"we do not recognize the taste of water because it is in our mouths
from the day we are born"

planning his getaway while making the usual post-coital cooing noises

one of those people who wants technology to look like technology

wearing watch outside shirt sleeve

kid standing outside restaurant blowing baritone tunelessly

samurai film: "Really? It'll hurt..."

dinosaurs are a boy thing

big, noisy, lots of teeth, stupid --- ideal role model

wheelchair love (high school idea of how strong feelings are)

"The Last Waltz" is the Victorian equivalent of "Stairway to Heaven"

"brushed jeans" (to accentuate knees and crotch) --- do it with them
on to get the contours right --- only gays and rock stars wear them

and rock stars wax their chests

"yes way!"

duckball (like pinball, with a duck walking back and forth to get away
from people)

unreasoning urge to tell people to get the hell off the grass

couple getting up from cafe table and forgetting jacket, and then we get
up a few minutes later and forget purse

in the royal gardens, a fast-flowing stream is dammed in winter to make
a pond, which then ices over

the kind of girl everybody dated, but no-one asked out to the prom

in spring, put lobster pots up in trees for use as duck nests

couple walking an English shepherd: "I betcha *she* bought the dog"

"not necessarily: he picked her, didn't he?"

German shepherd with kerchief tief around neck

the sweetest songbirds have the dullest plumage

put dullest flowers at entrance to garden, and brighter ones later on,
to have continual heightening of impression

duck chicks like the Duomo (seem to be moving to be everywhere)

Renaissance paintings all the same

actually only three or four, that are moved when you're not looking
  to always be in front of you

comment on street musician: "if he's making money, I'm psyched"

character's name is "Charles Christopher"

family calls him "Critter", but he prefers "CC"

argument about morality of "blind carbon copies" (Bcc) in mail
messages

half a dozen explanation of what the "B" is for

simultaneous attacks by two foes lead to mistaken belief that they are
allied

"once is chance, twice coincidence, thrice neither"

fat woman wearing T-shirt saying "No Limits To Your Body"

surreal conversation: call radio station in home country to get hockey
scores, not knowing that there's a phone-in about date rape

"file it under 'duh'"

couldn't face down a half wit with a Bic razor

short, very fat man with pudgy neck wearing black suit and sunglasses,
looking like a Muppet

"Winston Smith died for your sins"

announcer on the radio "Symphony Number C ... what am I saying?"

"well find us a side and put us on it!"

"we study the letter of the law so that we might be better able to
enforce its spirit"

man playing Scrabble (good metaphor for computing)

concentrating so hard that he eats his own lunch, then his hand
  wanders to his neighbour's and he eats part of that as well

squash racquet in the shower

"six hours talking and then maybe one hour not talking"

two guys standing by coffee machine, one with Playboy in his hand,
reading the cartoons out loud and laughing

cured meat in a sandwich; red, with glassy texture, translucent

ambimoustrous

mumblage (topic of one's mumbling)

depeditate (cut the foot off while printing)

a "spandrel" is the space between two arches

used in biology to denote organ which evolves from the nondescript
  stuff between other organs

buy a big radio receiver, get it home, then find out that it's just a
little receiver in a big case, and that the slides don't do anything

working with a grounds crew over the summer

one of the workmen spends his last few dollars buying everyone a can
  of Coke

"I don't like this boy, which means I don't like how he was raised,
which means I don't much like who raised him"

"yes I can say that about royalty, this is still half-way a republic"

"it's a fashion statement all right; it says 'bleah'"

couple walking down the street side by side, talking and laughing, both
with their arms crossed

"his songs are written by a committee, and his plays by a larger one"

leave one city gate standing, so that prophecy can be fulfilled

and taxes collected

trying to figure out what tourist is taking pictures of (follow him
around)

street lamps

law class: "King decreed that all small coins must be given to beggars;
does the goodness of this rebound on him, or on those who gave the
coins?"

no cost to him, except cost of goodwill, which is a considerable
  cost for a king to bear

recite animals belonging to emperor

why spotted bears? legend
lecturer gets in trouble: emperor no longer fashionable in Republic
Borges list
  -   those that belong to the Emperor,
  -   embalmed ones,
  -   those that are trained,
  -   suckling pigs,
  -   mermaids,
  -   fabulous ones,
  -   stray dogs,
  -   those included in the present classification,
  -   those that tremble as if they were mad,
  -   innumerable ones,
  -   those drawn with a very fine camelhair brush,
  -   others,
  -   those that have just broken a flower vase,
  -   those that from a long way off look like flies.

survivor of massacre standing in city square, surrounded by soldiers to
guard him, reciting "They came to take us all away, and only I
survived..."

the pissing disease

pillars in Gothic cathedrals represent trees

yet another age-old religious conspiracy

walked all the way to some city just to spit on someone's grave

one of those civil servants who might not actually have a first name

"he doesn't have three pennies to put in a row"

Emperors building palaces in a row down the river, one by one

city growing to follow them

"He's dumb like a fox"

"foxes aren't dumb"
"I think that was his point"

older brother died when walking railing of bridge late one night on bet
while drunk

taxonomizing zits

hard and dry is just scab
full of fluid
best are the ones where it feels like a little nub of soft plastic
girlfriend is grossed out, and not amused

one day, all the chickens in America will wake up and realize that hey,
they can buy guns too

Hardy Boys are takin' turns with Nancy Drew

another legal argument: street artist abandons chalk picture, another
artist touches it up

who has what claim on the revenue?

ill-fitted paving stones that scrape together when walked on

guess that it's a security measure
turns out to be simple bad workmanship

trees growing over lane

tied to grow that way, or reaching for the light?
"no-one left to ask", and then starts to cry

permanently cracked lips

"He set himself to build the machineries of Heaven, that they might
---"

sentence never completed (interrupted by a knock on the door)

calmly make a joke about cannibalism

"Any harm in taking a grisket out of that boy?"

start chapter with long series of preposition phrases, placing
character:

"In the year... a young man sat on the gnarled root of a tall
  tree, near a winding country road that led from ....."
and then say, "But our story does not start with him"

curvaceous woman comes slinking down stairs, man says: "here comes
trouble, looking for a swing band"

kid wearing sunglasses on back of head (baseball cap turned around)

punk with a crest of hair, like a monk's tonsure teased straight up

guessing how many pimples ripening at any one time, and what percentage
of body mass is corruption

derelict with a neck-only stoop in a worn green jacket wandering around
cafeteria, stopping abruptly and changing direction whenever anyone
looks straight in his face

I'm not going to like this decade

department store playing Barry Manilow, complete with the egregious
  key change

little hand gesture meaning "I've been served"

palm parallel to table, fingers slightly spread

few sounds as erotic as rain hammering on a plastic roof in summer

plastic shopping bag with accumulation of receipts in bottom

done deliberately: another strange ritual

who figured out how to work washing machines in the first place?

I mean, we all learn by being shown by someone else

fantasy list: #3 is being the moving man, and making it with the lady of
the house

but suddenly interrupted by wondering whether she'd be allergic to
  sawdust

"but who will feed the ducks when I'm gone?"

and then laugh, claiming it was a line from an old film

put out breadcrumbs every morning for the birds, and then discover that
the cleaning lady has been sweeping them away

watching birds launch themselves from balcony

jump with wings folded
hop side to side along railing, both feet at once

man tapping fingers on stringless lute

not allowed to beg
not allowed to play poorly

can't get away from televisions in Burger King

don't like running in the rain

step on too many slugs

man with protruding lower denture in restaurant

and you think: "please don't sit opposite me"

dawn is the rabbitting hour

legend of the bird that had such a sweet voice and ear that it never
sang, for fear of accidentally being discordant

"you'd think his privities were fashioned from rare metals and
precious gems, the way he guards them"

nasal ulcers

man holding scented handkerchief to nose while inspecting the poor

superior tells him to put it away
"But sir, it's an indelicate smell"
"Dammit, it's an indelicate world!"

story about scapegoat of the day

story from Sturgeon about teleporting one's own waste products out of
one's body

imagining them just hanging in the air for a moment, then falling to
  the ground, or maybe flying through the air if one did it from a
  moving train or bus
he paused for a second, then said quickly, "But I don't think you
  should read anything into this, I'm not obsessed and it's not some
  kind of sign that I loath myself or anything."

clean-shaven except for two tiny tufts right at the base of his
nostrils, which looked like elongated nasal hair

pity you can't leave a negative tip after a bad meal

a note saying "You owe me this much for having eaten your rotten
  food"

inventor of the Braille TV controller, and a cat flap for the fridge,
and the non-intrusive alarm clock (raises a little flag, very quietly,
instead of ringing)

get off the train and see the sign, "Budapest Loves Elvis!"

old man in a beret driving a shit-brown Chevette cutting us off in the
car park, giving us the finger in his rearview mirror, and then doing
the same to a bus at the intersection

explaining in shop why not to cycle with a big pack on (balance and wind
catch)

start and end with the image of a man being led on horseback to a lone
tree on the prairie to be hanged, laughing uncontrollably

in the US, if you're pissed off, you throw someone in front of a train;
in Canada, you do it to yourself to make them feel guilty

my inflatable Chinese globe with names chosen to be spaced out nicely,
rather than by importance

and no place names in Tibet

"like being married to a salt midge"

God was invented the morning after beer was invented, so that there'd
be someone to plead to or blame

so hot that I saw a cat chasing a bird, and they were both walking

you can judge the state of a love affair by the ratio of the times the
two people involved spend thinking about each other

if one person is spending an hour a day talking to himself, and the
  other is spending five minutes dreading his calls, and not thinking
  about him otherwise (or thinking about someone else), it's over

sending gifts to someone when a love affair is starting makes them think
of you; sending gifts as it's ending is just exasperating

a way to keep yourself uppermost in their mind
adults know that love and gratitude are not the same; trying to make
  someone love you by making them grateful for gifts is a bad idea

calling condoms raincoats

first time I saw a condom, I didn't know what it was, I thought it was
a balloon

the other kids had pointed it out on the pavement behind the
  grandstand
years later, I worried about what I might have done; I might have
  picked it up or tried to inflate it like a balloon, and that would
  have been the end of me in that town

a woman should pee right after sex to cut down the chance of vaginal
infection, even if it's a little unromantic

Melissa telling me to grow up ("no offense, but grow up") because I
keep saying what I want when I've been told I can't have it

I should have said, "And you need to thaw out," and tell her
  she's like a lake full of icebergs, and needs to feel what she
  feels instead of shunting it to one side

why does a woman who wears so little so much of the time have so many
clothes?

we shall all be reconciled in Heaven

there will be enough of everyone to go around, no more
  misunderstandings, no more hastily-spoken or wrongly-chosen words,
  everything forgiven, with none of the
  waiting-in-the-background-to-be-dredged-up poison of real-world
  forgiveness
all those people we just barely met that we wanted to get to know
  better will be there for us, along with all of those we got to know
  too well

on the train back from judo, glancing repeatedly at a woman studying a
piano score, never quite catching her eye, then getting off the train
and seeing her looking at me and waving and her waving back

like the feeling of a greasy piece of shit slipping down the hairs on
your butt, leaving a slug trail behind

argument by appeal to previous defeat: "Look, we've been over this"
"Yes, and you were wrong then, too!"

overhearing a conversation about a girl in the gym locker room: "got
her trained to call it my zucchini...she just loves zucchini"

wondering why women always pick men like that
wondering whether to tell her, whether she'll believe it

wearing a t-shirt that said "NOT FOOD"

students playing hockey in the corridor outside office

go outside to tell them "what you do outside office hours is your
  business; what you're doing in them is interrupting mine, so go
  away"
one says "or what?"
"what do you mean, or what? do you have to be threatened to behave
  like an adult?"

there are two kinds ghost: devil ghosts, who come back to haunt us, and
angel ghosts, who come back to see that we're OK, because they miss us
as much as we miss them

and the thing is, *we* get to decide what kind of ghost each is

after the first time she made love, she said "So that's why people
make such a big deal about rape. I always thought I would just be able
to lie there and pretend nothing was going on."

the first time we made love --- OK, we didn't actualy make love, just
got our shirts off and I got her jeans undone and my hand in but no
further --- two things struck me: the bicycle tan that flowed from
dark brown to pale white across her arms, like the coloration of a fish,
and her breasts, which were little pointy cones with slightly asymmetric
nipples, not globular like in the magazine pictures but little and
pointing out.

I've since learned that small breasts are much more sensitive. They
  almost always have bigger nipples, and there must be more nerve
  endings concentrated in them. But at the time, having learned all of
  what I knew about sex from the letters column in "Penthouse", I
  thought her excitement was normal. I've never met a big-breasted
  woman who really got turned on by having her nipples played with.

the songs that mean the most to us are the ones we listen to when we're
alone, and they're almost always sad songs

broaden her horizon by spreading her legs

a lot of geeks like the late shift part of the whole culture

it lets them brag/complain the next day about how late they were up,
  without saying that there wasn't any real need for them to be up
  that late
makes them feel like musicians or party goers
I've never bothered; I'm an early-morning person
I occasionally overlapped with John --- he was a late nighter,
  running from whatever ghosts haunted him when there were real people
  around during the day, hiding from them in the basement at night
  with the sound of the air conditioning

all his ghosts were might have beens, and he was only 20 when I met him

things he should have said to bullies, kung fu moves (he could see
  them clearly, hear the crunching sound of his elbow into teeth,
  stopping turning slamming the heel of his hand into a nose)
"what happened, Dolman, did you trip over your feet again?" was
  what he should have said

it's not just the book you're reading, but when you're reading it,
what kind of mood you're in

Dutch clocks ring the time twice, once on the hour and once a minute
later just in case you missed the count

I knew I was over her when my normal daydreams started to push out the
"I should have said" and replays of conversations with her

Dutch is a language in which to curse bad football; French is a language
in which to be scornful

after you break up --- sorry, this is supposed to be the truth ---
after you've been dumped for someone else, you should move, because
otherwise you'll spend your evenings telling yourself that she's not
going to call, and that it's stupid to make deals with yourself like
"If she doesn't call by Sunday, then it's over" because if that's
how you're thinking, it's already over

he was a specialist in the resuscitation of hanged men

breathe in as pretty women walk by to inhale a whiff of perfume or soap

not when they're right beside you, but just afterwards, as the air
  swirls around in their wake

tandem bicycle going by with two guys on it

father and son?
older one in back had only one leg, jeans cut off near hip and sewn
  up

if you buy oranges by weight, remember that you're paying for the pips

a hollow bronze statue that sung as it warmed up (air escaping)

trying a pear tree for murder after man choked to death on its fruit

"chain smoking" apple juice cartons: tear tab off next and stuff it
into previous one

it's raining knives out there

maybe if you're blind, you want to sing the blues, or maybe if you sing
the blues it makes you go blind

"you're a great raw"

"I would have said cook, but that doesn't seem appropriate for a
  salad"

tying a knot in a cherry stem with only your tongue

spitting cherry seeds over the balcony, watching the cat scramble to
each one and then sniff at it suspiciously

Frenchman going running in shorts, a t-shirt, Reeboks, and argyle socks

a rich agricultural smell

sacrificing a sheep to the mosquitoes (shaving part of its skin)

looking for Vegan (cruelty-free) bondage gear

send a self-abused stomped antelope...

"m'lord likes to be awakened by having gin dripped into his mouth from
a feather"

a dream about the erotic uses of warm coffee with lots of milk in it

dip a finger in it and drip it into her mouth
wipe the finger across her lips and then lick it off
dip the finger again and draw a circle around your own nipple, then
  look at her archly

Ry Cooder is great mosquito-squashing music (dancing around with a
dampened towel waiting for them to settle on the white stucco walls to
the sound of "Get Rhythm")

park bike for ten minutes, find a pink chain lock on it

it's strange what we remember about people. He dressed in primary
colors, and in the last days of his illness his bowel movements smelled
of peanut butter and orange peels, as the bacteria in his gut ran wild

"It'll get worse before it gets better, and it might never get
better."

"He was such a collection of nervous tics that I couldn't figure out
which were his tells."

she put on her cheerful/casual voice, the one she used when she wanted
to slip another hint that she was in love with someone else into the
conversation

like a forced smile for the cameras

to get even with her, he put her name in to every mailing list he could
find

in Rotterdam, they sell shirts with the sleeves already rolled up (a
working class town)

a woman named Aelfgyva appears in the Bayeux Tapestry; no-one knows what
she represents or why she's there

"his was the bleak philosophy of a bare mountain"

a platypus is the divine equivalent of a typo

you know your life's a shambles when you really look forward to
brushing your teeth

the satisfying rush you get after the first few strokes, as you find
  a rhythm
the creamy feeling of toothpaste before it goes frothy (helps if
  it's well lubricated, otherwise there's a moment of gumminess)

maybe there's a place out there where life makes sense. Maybe there's
a place out there where everyone does The Right Thing. Maybe there's a
place --- maybe it's Utah --- where all code is properly commented,
and no-one goes to bed hungry or alone, and it never rains when you're
at a picnic. But maybe not.

sitting there reading tomorrow's paper

but it would have helped, if that had been the problem

some women's buns make little shelves in their jeans, and jerk up and
down at an angle like mice in a cloth bag when they walk

posture? habit? anatomy? who cares?

the Ministry of Foreign Persecution

"with fingers like these, I was had to be a pianist, a pickpocket, or a
surgeon, and I don't have the musical ability to be a pickpocket"

God and I have two things in common: our names are easy to remember, and
we have a tendency to judge people harshly

He was the sort of person who'd read in a management book that a good
way to establish control over a situation was to ask a question, pause
until the other person opened his or her mouth to reply, and then plough
on over top of them. Needless to say, he had few friends.

couple of teenagers trying to move a cupboard full of plates without
taking the plates off the shelves

father unstacks the plates, puts cheap plastic ones in their place,
  and makes the kids move the shelves over and over until they can do
  it without spilling a plate

tug of war is the national sport

long disquisition on muddy fields, artificial turf, ways of wrapping
  the rope around your back if you're the anchor, etc.

Jesus Murphy and Joseph

"thanks for understanding" is girl talk for goodbye

comforting macho feeling of walking out to the car with a coil of
extension cord over one's shoulder

thinking about being young when telling my niece about her father's
days as a Boy Scout

Biker Mice from Mars

waking up with the computers re-booting during a lightning storm

going to sleep with the hum of the computers around me, one flashing
Star Trek stars

rain on the one day we were supposed to do the septic tank

"a week of no significance" (like the "year of no significance"
book)

I'm waiting on a train that's already gone

guy on the TTC making a joke about the word I was pointing to (using
finger to hold book open)

you can tell a lot about people from how they stand when they brush
their teeth

man in a business suit at King subway station with a hockey stick

Lloyd's story about the engineer falling through the window

"how's it going?" "other than my life, fine"

experience is what you get when you don't get what you want

a town called Long Crow, and the Gate of a Thousand

"what do you look at on the subway?" "people's shoes --- you can
tell a lot about people from their shoes"

"why 3 streets with the same name?" "geological drift --- we'd
have to check their fossil records to be sure"

people would jump into a river to save a drowning kid; why are they
unwilling to have a few bucks taken out of their paycheque if they're
willing to risk their life?

rule number 6: roll down the window *before* spitting

people never go to the toilet on Star Trek; they just have the crap
beamed out of them

debate: is God an asymptote or a direction? God as an asymptote toward
which we are evolving, or God as an infinity (hard to tell one from the
other just by looking at the graph)

when they had already broken up, he took all of her old cassette tapes,
ran them through the filtering gear at the lab, and made a tape of the
background voices, including her mother's

I'm no good in the morning until I've had a shower and an enema ---
OK, I lied about the enema

walk into room to hear punchline: "And then the cleaner said, 'Hey,
there's nothing in my contract about internal organs!'"

I'm sorry, are my ribs getting in the way of your elbow?

every year he wore a red plastic poppy on Remembrance Day, pinned low on
his shirt below the pocket. Only those who knew him well knew that he
pinned it over the scar left by the piece of shrapnel that had give him
his ticket out of that war.

soldiers with painted nails

the Perfume River

bad dreams like a shovel turning over the depths of my mind (Fenton)

seeing apartments is one way to meet women

the radio was tuned to the Loud Sports channel (probably not what it was
actually called, but that's what it sounded like)

click on Gangster icon at Livermore booth, get Tammi's voiceover, feel
homesick

flipping through channels at hotel, find "Wonder Years" episode in
which he kisses her for the first time; a couple of nights later,
flipping through again, hit episode in which the patch of trees they
used to run around in is going to be developed, so they spend one last
evening playing hide and seek and all the childish games

call the tool ATGAWT: All The Good Acronyms Were Taken

radio in the cab playing Eagles: "don't let the sound of your own
wheels make you crazy"

the Wright Brothers flyer hanging in the Air and Space Museum; not far
away, the Gossamer Condor, that was peddled across the Channel, whose
wingspan is greater than the Flyer's first flight

back in the land of "Au Bon Pain"

feeling myself get better Thursday morning

sitting in the TV porch Thursday afternoon, being cautious, reading 300
pages of trash science fiction, not trying to fool myself that I'd
absorb any of the Northrop Frye I'd been looking at the night before

what being cut out of Jane's dinner party symbolized

what writing about it symbolizes: I'm out of love (but if that's so,
why did I think about Melissa in the airport on the way out Friday
morning, and again on the way back in a week later?)

phoning the Clarry brothers and Arno Lukas on a whim

when she was young, she wanted to be an acrobatic minister (the two
things she enjoyed most were gymnastics and religion): "juggling for
Jesus"

only time the sadness hit me on this trip was when I pulled on a sweater
and there were these long blonde hairs on it

rollerblading for the first time: asphalt moguls

niblings (nieces and nephews): thanks for the word, Ali

Soviet medical system surreptitiously keeping records of tissue types
for emergency transplants for Party bigwigs (urban myth?)

ducks by the side of the pond taking off one by one as we walk toward
them

the Vietnam Veterans' Memorial and the Lincoln Memorial so close
together: neither makes sense without the other

rats at the base of the Washington Monument: signs and portents again

woman on the TTC reading "Do What You Love, the Money Will Follow"; I
thought of Mark Twain's story of the incompetent actor and of my own
ambitions to write

one planet, many worlds

"now that's a sentence you don't hear very often..."

"Joseph's at his Gaelic lesson" (little girl playing with the
Christmas Manger toys)

wanted ad in USA Today at the airport run by Alcohol Tobacco and
Firearms

sign up at a freeway on-ramp "if you lived here, you'd be home by
now"

swishing saliva around in your mouth to get the last scraps of food

Museum of Suspect Medical Devices in Minneapolis

small-town Canada smell of ice hockey changing rooms and hardware
stores: like wet rubber and anodized aluminum

don't you ever feel tempted to put it in first, say "to hell with this
paved shit", and take off across the neighbors' back yards?

wearing a rugby shirt with sleeves rolled up so that they're just below
the elbows on the forearms --- might have been stylish --- who
knows?

"I've heard that tone of breath before"

measuring mattress by cutting a piece of string, then going into shop
with piece of string and having it measured before buying sheets;
girlfriend mortified by the practicality of it all

I knew I was a grown-up the day I stopped liking Cheerios

guy says, "Hey, these aren't *my* crayons!" and everyone laughs
(joke is never explained)

septum protruded just enough (or maybe nostrils were scallopped high
enough) for roots of nostril hairs to be seen

lots of things hide from the sun (vampires), but nothing does the
reverse, because who can hide from the night?

teaching a child to play chess --- king and queen are shepherd and
dog, other kind is sheep

making love is not like making music, unless all you're thinking about
is improvising sex (jazz); it's more like making a house, where you add
things one by one, building up something that will take your weight and
shelter you and make you feel at home

the disease "sturnusemia" from Findlay's "Headhunter"

describe the strange proportions of a sword (seems strange to someone
used to knives --- handle is too large)

the hanged man carries a concertina, not a banjo

the blue-eyed man wears a crucifix on a gold chain; at the end of the
story, a white dog with blue eyes sits on a wagon wearing the same chain
and crucifix

A Conan Doyle as a character? (check dates)

Solomon himself would have found the church imposing

the smell of pickle brine

the provinces of the sea

baked an English plum pudding spiced with gunpowder

"OK, hands up everyone who feels giddy" (after a dinner party's jokes
have gotten out of control)

standing up and pretending to be a map of South America

ground-sky-ground (tumbling off a bike or horse)

as the world breaks down, escalators will stop working

rippling effect of windblown sand looks like a dense school of fish in
the water

you can walk through shallow water, but as it gets deeper, it eventually
becomes quicker for you to swim

"Don't patronise me --- don't tell me how things actually are from
my point of view, because you don't know and I do!"

Mister Stiches (the stitch-it-up man (a fixer))

explorers use patronage to get away from patrons

"We shall impregnate your women!"

coming into a hostile meeting, start by pointing out that someone has
left their car lights on (defuse situation)

working in Canada, compiling on machines in Scotland and Australia
because they're lightly loaded (time difference) and not seeing
anything strange in that

yesterday's snow job is today's sermon, yesterday's blow job is
today's bourbon (seen on a men's room wall)

foresight is knowing that the train is coming; forethought is getting
off the tracks

joke about putting a TV antenna in your mouth to save on cable costs,
but it wouldn't really work, because you only receive black and white

sunshine and pigeon shit

licking chocolate ice cream off the floor is much less fun that licking
it off a leg

old people get cuter as they shrivel up

fixing up a woman with a guy who's a real shit (dates 16-year-olds,
says, "It's legal in Mexico") so that at least she'll have one ex
about whom she can't say, "Well, he was such a nice guy."

the Nashville Underground

random event horizon

hand brushing cotton trousers sounds like distant surf

liberal democracy as a societal equivalent of climax vegetation?

women do the burying and grieving because often they're the only ones
left (war, mine cave-in)

you're a country when other countries are willing to honor your
passport

rarely fruitful to dsicuss something when people hold their views with
different strengths (one person will just feel uncomfortable that the
other isn't willing to concede as much)

a classroom where the lecturer is saying, "Yta-zvi redeno," and
explaining that "redeno" means "to cease being, without any
possibility of resuming" ("to stop" or "to cease" both have "to
go" or "to resume" possibilities) and drilling on pronunciation:
"yta-zvi" is "his intrinsic self", and is pronounced "hTA!" (whole
class does this), while "redeno" has the accent on the first syllable,
as all properly-formed words do

r-strategy (lots of little offspring, opportunistic) and K-strategy (a
few large offspring, specialized or long-lived)

semi-stiffened chocolate (lewd joke)

another victim of rectal yams

death by hiccups --- doesn't even leave the victim his/her dignity

dip the raw-cut ends of roofing timbers in paint and let stand over
night, then repeat again and again (so that water can't soak in)

the single electron theory (there's only one, and it spends all of its
time rushing from place to place) is echoed in the single program theory
(there's only one, and the reason software breaks so often is that
someone else is modifying it at the same time you are)

ecopoiesis: the process of a system making a home for itself (the
building and its occupants jointly are the new system and must both
adjust)

repeat the mantra: "Michael is a dork", "Michael is a dork"

fire everyone whose last name starts with a letter of the alphabet

watching "Star Trek", then staying up until 11:00 to phone my brother
(3 hours time difference) to discuss the episode

The Entitled

Jo Evans' story about having the runs next to a constipated old Chinese
woman

was going to call this story "A Season in Hell", but (a) that title's
been used, and (b) it wasn't really hell compared with what it could
have been, hence "A Season in Heck"

Karen Reid's summers at the cottage: get up, put on a bathing suit,
swim and water ski all day, put on clothes around 6:00 or 7:00, eat,
drink, read, play cards, go to sleep, repeat

"We're best friends, whether we like it or not."

Lloyd's story about the guy getting out of the back of the truck to
take a leak, and his friend drives off, and the guy freezes to death.

surreptitious orgasms on the next-to-back seat of the bus

I like Kermit because when he laughs, his mouth opens up all the way,
like this (and then laugh at the person)

she asks, "Is pool like chess? Once you put the white ball down,
you're not allowed to move it?" And he says, "How can it be like
chess? There isn't a white ball in chess..."

it's like the sound you make when you dry heave (if you've ever
dryheaved)

Mutant inbred halfwit pigfondling blood clot... Dangfang drippy-nosed
slackbellied gumbrained....

cross hands and wiggle fingers (like a bird's wings) to show that
things are getting weird

doing an IQ test --- solving the letter pattern problems by rhythm

something very satisfying about digging under a fingernail with the
rough edge of an incisor

feel a little embarrassed buying glossy-covered magazines (teenage
memories)

it felt like all his points were made in passing

have to wonder whether someone who writes so many one-sentence
paragraphs does so because none of his thoughts are large enough to
require two sentences

you need a louder guitar, a louder voice, but a quieter shirt

Secretary of State Forrestal committed suicide in 1949?

the drive up to Sudbury: skydiving Elvises, Stalin and the Bomb, Ontario
under snow, lots of little trees (Inuit name for the south), and me
thinking about Melissa

your bathrobe should be terry cloth, so that when the day comes that you
forget your towel, you can dry yourself with it

getting a letter that begins, "Dear Sir, We have reviewed your
application, and are unable at present to determine why you are."

to use the name of a country, to you the name of a war (like Vietnam)

listening to Bob Kerr, "Off the Record", CBC, twelve years ago in
Kingston

skeptimist (a term applicable to Pratchett)

staring off into inner space

a town called St. Donat by the Stream

the private theology of the schizophrenic or mildly retarded

an art critic named Joanna De Caf

you can't jump over your own shadow

a boy frightened by a Mobius strip (but knows how to do magic)

use antlers as metaphor: start by wanting to grow them fully, then carve
them, then prune them, then cut them off entirely ("what's that
called? it's a hat --- never saw such damn foolishness in my
life..."), then finally get a crown of false antlers to wear

a life like Bran Flakes several hours after the milk had been added
--- nutritious, but unappetizing

the boy vaguely remembers telling his mother about his "secret uncle",
who'd play with him only when adults weren't around, who rose smoothly
and silently to step out of the room whenever an adult stepped in ---
actually a ghost, so they had to leave the house --- others in the
town had known of the ghost, but said nothing to the newcomers

imagine if your hand had woken up one morning and realized that it was
attached to --- no, part of --- an arm, a whole body, and not just
realized, but *felt*

a bony-white golgotha rose

I'd never heard a wolf howl --- the guide had to hold me to stop me
from running out to run with them, howl with them, hug them --- where
I come from, gryphons are nothing strange

it will happen when salmon jump in the street

old men knitting in the sun, while the old women shell peas and plan a
war (actually a face competition)

you are not correct, you are merely less wrong

man married to a beast: "Is your horse beautiful? Your dog? Look upon
her as a horse, or a dog, or a falcon---" and another interrupts
sourly, "Or a snake", and the first replies, "Aye, not all beauty is
sweet."

first man says, I will send my son to live with you; second stiffens and
says, I did not ask for hostages; first says, If you had, I'd have
given you my knife to hold hostage in your belly.

fat with stupidity, if not with food

translate some passages into Klingon?

mad man in the woods breeding jaguars: men bred wolves a hundred times
to make dogs, why not jaguars to make something else?

images: a hunter slaying a deer, a woman working at a pot, sighing, then
starting over --- next scene is husband and wife eating and talking;
only later realize that the first two were *not* the husband and wife,
but a god and goddess (start the next chapter with the deer and pot
again)

late at night, the moon and a single jet contrail --- I thought the
contrail made the scene more beautiful, she thought it spoiled it

flies trapped between the panes of double glazing in the window

letting the captured beast go --- take it to a clearing, drive a sword
into a stump for it to cut its bonds, sign "full moon - empty moon -
full moon - you come here"

I do not want what I can get

Grendel's Law: There is no limit to desire but desire's needs

tharn (Watership Down)

blue rats (really grey --- have to be fed special berries to make
their coats blue)

poetry critic complaining that the work is full of conventional
religious images like "the wolf in spring, the branch fallen from the
tree..."

two types of stories: "of long ago" and "it really happened"

men go hunting in order to have stories to tell afterward (Le Guin)
--- hard to sound heroic gathering oats

"this is weird" --- "no, it's just unusual"

start with young boy in strange world --- by the end of the story,
he's just a normal man in our world

how provincial: you use "world" to mean both "planet" and
"universe"

he was hit by lightning --- welded his zipper shut (stolen from Cormac
McCarthy, "All the Pretty Horses")

a stain where someone had used a not-quite-dry leaf as a bookmark

the old cat flowed like dirty mercury

descend the stairs, down and down; when you notice that they've been
ascending for a while, you know you're near the end

spiral tunnel of time --- the deeper you go, the more time has passed
when you come out --- man chasing a couple into it, deeper and deeper

"grow some knackers" == find some courage

draw a door in the ground, pull it open, someone comes running out of it
at right angles to the ground, slam the door, as something begins to
pound on it the person falls back onto the ground

wheel == yard (unit of measure)

the Big Empty

bass vs. alto instead of light vs. dark --- both necessary

drink until you can hear whispered prophecy in the glugging of the beer
coming out of the bottle

take buttons off dress shirt and sew on mis-matched ones instead

a "fluent" is a time-varying truth

call Death "The Reaper Man" (homage a Pratchett)

if you could speed trees up, you'd hear them humming

the Undernet

Clem Stradivarius (brother of the more famous et cetera) invented the
electric guitar in the early 1800s. They locked him away in a basement,
of course, since electricity itself hadn't yet been invented, but in
his own mind, the thing he'd built made such a beautiful sound.

Nostradamus' Secret Recipes (newspaper headline)

filed alphabetically by last author's first name (sarcastically)

Road Scholars

as he got older, his ears got hairier, and deprived him of one of the
great pleasures of his life, which was to have them nibbled by
attractive young women. They might still have been willing to nibble,
but he was embarrassed to suggest it.

I don't touch the undersides of tables, or the surfaces of public
seating --- I know what *I* wipe onto them.

in the future, everyone will be on trial for 15 minutes

streaks of bird droppings like makeup after tears

ormolu? cloisonne?

take a window seat into Vancouver, but an aisle seat into Toronto (lots
to see on the one, better to get off the plane quickly on the other)

my mail consists of ads, bad news, and bills

Galileo's first radio telescope

the door spoke

a drawing of a boxer throwing the same punch forever

he was spitting thorns (or chewing thorns)

flowers called mandolins and cellos

a little blood buys a little truth

cut off a major limb to get a long view, but what you see is what
  the world would have been if you hadn't cut it off
only in the instant of death is all revealed

spiders under the sink and near the windows are pets

guy in the elevator swaying to the music on his headphones, fellow
passenger says, "Must be good, who is it?" and the guy says,
"Mozart--- man, I wish he'd lived long enough to write reggae."

"This pernicious doctrine of 'sin', which holds that an act can be
evil in and of itself --- just think of it, the intention in a
person's soul counts for nothing!"

"Loyalty is not to the person of the monarch, but to the office..."

Eldest Woman is an honoric title

the king was knitting in his study...

walking home after seeing a movie alone, three young women crossing the
street at right angles, all giggly, say good night with lots of
exaggerated hugs and squeals, smiling at them, noticed, one (possibly
slightly tipsy) turns and says, "Do you want to say good night too?",
a bit of banter about "I'd love to, but I have a weak heart, and a hug
from you would probably put me in my grave", "But what about just a
little kiss?", "Oh, that'd probably put you in yours --- I'm good
at kissing," and then it turns out he is, but he spoils it by writing
down his phone number and giving it to her and she never calls.

square-flippered and tortoise-flippered seals

peg sandals, elaborately gilded (cheap gilding leaves between the big
toe and its neighbor)

trying to seduce a woman, hot muggy evening, it starts to rain, step
outside into the warm, wet downpour and the thunder, shirts soaked
through and clinging, who could resist?

guy asking a girl out for the first time: "We could go to dinner; no,
that wouldn't work, I'd be sitting there with my mouth open, food
falling out. Or a movie --- no, I wouldn't enjoy it, get a crick in
my neck from looking sideways at you. Or dancing, except it's difficult
to dance with a tentpole---" and that's when she punched him, and he
knew it was going to work.

So smoke another sausage, and have another beer, I don't know where
Jesus went, but he sure as hell ain't here

the king's ring (commander says, "The king gave me this," then
catapults it into a city under siege and tells his troops, "Now bring
it back!")

peel an apple, then rub it under armpits to freshen up (country boy)

Wet Texas

the Blind Old Dog (death)

you only ever cut yourself with a dull knife (sharp ones don't slip) (a
proverb applicable to the treacherous)

Calvin Klone's (disparaging term for jeans)

porcelain flute

a horse's stale (its sweat)

bowl of cereal with a glass of milk beside it (don't like soggy cereal)

a college party with collection jars near the door for various charities
(guy jokes that he put an unlabelled one up for himself and made $10)

same planet, different sunrise

Coat of Bells

a jug of warm, salty water at the table, so that people can clear their
throats (and spittoons for the same reason)

boy and girl talking about whose time is worth more, he says he doesn't
mind the extra drive, she says "But if I picked you up we could drive
together, wouldn't that be better?" and he thinks for a moment and
says, "I dunno, I'd need a slide rule to work it out."

"You remind me of who I used to be. You'll notice that I changed."

call on the phone, say "Tag" into the answering machine

rain bouncing off thatched rooves looks like steam rising

gospel mushrooms

plant that drinks blood; sting is slightly narcotic; small pots of it
kept in cities by the decadent

"I don't want to spend the rest of my life eating cockroach
footprints"

"If we let them go, and they sin again, then *we* will have
sinned..."

Othello instead of chess, as a metaphor for changing political alliances
and the need to get "outside" your opponent.

According to legend, king once had his sons raised as orphans, to see
which would be fit to succeed him, but sent each one a small present
each year. Kings still do this, but the fiction that the children don't
know who there father is has run pretty thin, and the gifts (the
"king's boots") are substantial.

learning wall (rather than learning curve)

a mercenary librarian (world in which information is that valuable)

Don't know if this is a gift or a curse.

Chocolate hide and seek.

Cluey (opposite of clueless).

stress hippo air drop at a kite show

a ring snake (kite longer on inside than outside)

ladder kites (Chinese)

interrupt speaker at end of fairy tale, just as he says, "...why it is
called the City of Kites".

"a real stitch counter" = "a perfectionist"

sock kites: an open-mouthed carp, a decapitated penguin

He shed his worries by transferring them to a lamppost. What had been a
minor worry for him, however, was a major one for the lamppost, because
it had never worried before. It suddenly started wondering if its light
would go out just as one car overtook another, or if it might fall onto
a pedestrian during a storm. It tried to talk about its fears with other
lampposts, but they didn't understand, because they had never worried.

He saw his father reading and talking at the same time, and wondered how
it was possible. His father laughed and said, "As you get better at
reading, you'll be able to do it, too." But he never did. As other
children started to be able to sense each other's feelings, and feel
the long, slow breathing of the trees, he remained as inert as a piece
of iron. One day his family could deny it no longer: he was such a bad
reader, there was no life for him but that of a soldier.

Armageddon better not be late

a bug like that would be really squishy, especially if you stepped on it
with bare feet

comment on seeing someone talk to himself in car, companion says,
"Yeah, I do that when I'm practising speeches," reply, "Me too, only
I do it in the subway."

"I'm not a horrible, ugly monster," said the horrible, ugly monster.

"I liked him better when he was just a fictional character"

"You don't get caviar from beluga. You *can* milk 'em, but your
hands get really cold..."

sloppy aristocrat who puts up his collar when he eats, then folds it
down again to hid the spilt food

the "stitch & yell" method

"former, middler, and latter"

bark soup

pennies embedded in the floor for luck

everything is a symbol, if only of itself

forgotten how cold Scottish toilet seats could be in January

the horse preened itself, running its beak through its feathers

man in washroom standing at urinal with infant in his arms, juggling the
baby and his needs; baby watching, fascinated, then looking up at me
wide-eyed and open-mouthed

priests wear mirrors (legacy of vampire days)

describe the old courtyard, built in the reign of XXXX, with the trees,
leafless in winter, and the steps leading up to the newer building, worn
in the middle, with whitish stains in the corners from soap not mopped
away

climate in Amsterdam is that of London on a foggy day

Maupin would call the air "spongy"

building with convex front, mirror windows, reflecting and distorting
the whole street

stalls selling seeds

Scythian exhibition --- dusty grey riders impaled on dusty grey horses,
slumped over and looking tired

Celtic-like animals become Greek heroes
boot soles decorated (princesses sat cross-legged, and rarely
  walked)

the Nieuwe Kirk is high and narrow like St Giles, big like St Paul's,
with lots of old wooden fixtures

patriotic stained glass (William of Orange and doves)

street organs and men with little brass bedpans

I thought they were collecting for charity but they do it for a
  living

Van Gogh (hoccch) T-shirts (sunglasses and headphones)

skim of ice on the canals like the skin on tomato soup that's gone cold
while I write 26 postcards

everyone smokes

wander into a drug cafe by accident

ten-week half-life for bikes

reading "The English Patient", "Song of Solomon", Armistead Maupin

read "The Independent" every weekend --- a remembered pleasure

lots of tourists (often hand-holding couples)

World Service for news, Dutch Radio 4 for black-tie music (even the
announcer's voice is soothing)

cyclists don't wear helmets

skating on outdoor track: lots of speed skaters/p>

skates are weird --- long and skinny, tiny boot, some people
  barefoot

in this country, they really do stack their trays neatly in the
cafeteria

building leaning together because supports have rotted

Jonathan's "missing city" when we went to Bruges

little dog barking at puppet in the street in Bruges

a "charcoalerie" (foreign guess at barbecue)

I don't know brand names, and I don't have to care

the many uses of an umbrella (point, gesture, clear a path)

pictures made of layers of coloured paper, carefully cut in relief

spy window low on canal side of tower to look at passing boats

Mark Twain: "Scientists have odious manners, except when you prop up
their theory; then you can borrow money off them."

floor of Christ Church Dublin is a riot of different kinds of tiles

Dublin smells like diesel and fish & chips

swords always smaller than expected

houses in Galway like those in small-town Scotland: rectangular, white
stucco walls, rained on

an old man with the largest ears I've ever seen (huge lobes)

three women on the train speaking Gaelic, singing "Amazing Grace" and
other tunes

fish restaurant in Galway

Belgian blues night

man in a wheelchair fishing in the canal

never grow just a moustache --- always grow a beard, then shave

statue at Muziektheater of man's head and shoulders breaking through
floor, fiddling placidly

porno Tetris

advertisement for a survival weekend in Luxembourg

seeing Jeff's chess set in San Gimignano

no-one on duty at Tourist Information in Brussels airport --- nothing
to tell tourists

Italy is a nation in which the principal mode of transportation is the
two-wheeled lawnmower

some of them are lawn mowers on steroids

architecture like a child god's scattered toys

kid standing outside restaurant blowing baritone tunelessly

ain't no fishing miles on this truck

fortune telling with a ritual peg board

niece Allison, friend Alison --- taxed by l's in name (older you get)

documentation == code tattoos

"feeling like a used piece of outhouse moss"

outhouse moss cutters

you get a very different impression of the shape of human shit if you
spend your life crapping in toilets

You think of a tree as pushing its roots down into the soil. The thing
is, once they're there long enough, the tree stops noticing where the
roots leave off and the soil begins. It just feels the groundwater
flowing through it, not between it like water between your fingers but
really through it, like it was the soil itself. The closest a person can
come is floating in a warm pool, flowing with the gentle currents, no
longer contained in a balloon of skin.

"Have you come to salvage me?"

Shit and salvage...

An ephemerum is a short-lived insect

a humility garden

science is about how the universe works; engineering is about how to
change it

retail therapy

the compass fell (like a compass rose)

crabs weaving their webs in tidal pools

my cities are made of restaurants and bookstores, subway stations and
the homes of friends

Saying: he wants to be a big ship in a little harbor.

"Please take the furniture out for a walk---your father and I have
things to discuss."

Geomancy is the working of magic with the power of the earth. It is a
female pursuit in most cultures, except among the Koreans, where the
majority of geomancers are widowed men who then wed the earth and begin
learning their trade at the age of 70 or more.

Was just out cycling for an hour and a half; longest I've been on a
bike since Oregon, more than a year ago. It's hot out there, and I'm
sitting here in the office sweating. Amsterdam is full of cycling paths;
I went down to the Amsterdamse Bos park, then halfway up into the center
of town, then around by the Amstel River and back to the University. The
whole time, I was noticing the breasts of the women cycling by. I guess
it's something to do with posture, but it seemed that every third or
fourth woman had perfectly-shaped breasts under a bright cling-film
T-shirt. Little ones, medium-sized ones (I don't find big breasts
attractive --- they have the consistency of water balloons, and don't
look good unless they're trussed up in ornate underwear and their owner
is standing still), most in bras, some not, happy-looking women,
serious-looking women, women with wraparound sunglasses on that made it
impossible to tell what mood they were in... I don't want to spend my
summers alone any more. I don't want to wake up on my own for the rest
of my life.

A list of some of the government proclaimed days, weeks and months:

Bob Marley Day (Feb. 6)
Hand-Washing Awareness Week (Feb. 20-25)
National Procrastination Week (March 6-12)
National Composting Awareness Week (May 1-7)
Shoe Week (May 6-13)
Midwives Day (May 6)
International No Diet Day (May 6)
Celebrate Your Watershed Day (May 7)
Responsible Pet Ownership Day (May 14)
Tap Dance Day (May 25)

New York State Senator James Donovan, speaking in support of capital
punishment: "Where would Christianity be if Jesus got eight to fifteen
years with time off for good behavior?"

Lord Kelvin (Popular Lectures I 73): "When you can measure what you are
speaking about and express it in numbers, you know something about it;
but when you cannot measure, when you cannot express it in numbers, your
knowledge is of a meager and unsatisfactory kind: but you have scarcely,
in your thoughts advanced to the stage of a science"

### From Boswell's Life of Johnson

[Mr. Hunter] was very severe, and wrong-headedly severe. He used to
beat us unmercifully; and he did not distinguish between ignorance and
negligence; for he would beat a boy equally for not knowing a thing, and
for neglecting to know it. He would ask a boy a question; and if he did
not answer it, he would beat him, without considering whether he had an
opportunity of knowing how to answer it. For instance, he would call up
a boy and ask him Latin for a candlestick, which the boy could not be
expect to be asked. Now, Sir, if a boy could answer every question,
there would be no need of a master to teach him.

When a man writes from his own mind, he writes very rapidly. The
greatest part of a writer's time is spent in reading, in order to
write: a man will turn over half a library to make one book.

I have read in them where the pages are open, and I do not suppose that
what is in the pages which are closed is worse than what is in the open
pages.

Edwards: You are a philosopher, Dr. Johnson. I have tried too in my time
to be a philosopher; but, I don't know how, cheerfulness was always
breaking in.

Depend upon it, that if a man talks of his misfortunes, there is
something in them that is not disagreeable to him; for where there is
nothing but pure misery, there never is any recourse to the mention of
it.

There is no reason why any person should exert himself for a man who has
written a good book: he has not written it for any individual. I may as
well make a present to the postman who brings me a letter.

Calculating that a thousand guests per year is only three per day: That,
Sir, is the good of counting. It brings every thing to a certainty,
which before floated in the mind indefinitely.

Samuel Madden: "In an orchard there should be enough to eat, enough to
lay up, enough to be stolen, and enough to rot upon the ground."

Milton was a genius that could cut a Colossus from a rock; but could not
carve heads upon cherrystones.

An odd thought strikes me: we shall receive no letters in the grave.

### From The Rise and Fall of the House of Medici

...he had to be carried about the house and would cry out as though in
agony as he approached a doorway. "Why do you scream so?" his wife
once asked him, "Nothing has happened." "If anything had happened,"
he replied, "it wouldn't be any use crying out."

"These citizens would bring us water in their ears."

"Your Holiness, this is not my dining-hall," replied Chigi giving a
signal to his servants to pull down the tapestries which concealed rows
of mangers. "It is merely my stable."

## Story Ideas

Midnight feline ninja school (at the end, the cat wonders what the dogs
do, and we discover they're fighting aliens).

Alliween (alligators dressing up as humans for their Hallowe'en).

Slow life in the Oort cloud viewing life on Earth as an awkward
infection (messages from Mom).

[Scientists on remote island have similar
dreams](http://blogs.discovermagazine.com/discoblog/2010/07/29/isolated-in-the-farallons-biologists-have-bizarre-island-invasion-dreams/)

Story idea: the last few scientists at an observatory in the mountains
as civilization winds down due to climate change. They have finally made
contact with an alien species, but there's no one left to tell who'd
care. We came so close to greatness...

Story idea: Scott of the Antarctic; the rock samples were Elder
artefacts, the changes ascribed to scurvy were actually caused by
exposure to alien relics, "I'm going outside and I may be some time."
Re-read The Coldest March before writing this one.

Story idea: putting people into stasis over and over again so that they
can take part in interstellar speed-of-light communication. After a
while, the real "aliens" are their own civilization.

Story for younger readers (Ellen Reid) about a parachute bear: the Code
is, "Never let people see you're alive!" but she has to steer her
parachute to save a lost dog.

Batman/Cthulhu crossover: Batman's strength comes from tapping into
elder evils; he thinks he can control it; the Joker is a superhero from
an earlier generation who also tried, but failed, or possibly the Batman
thrown back in time.

Story idea: the young Prince Nuthe decides that renting laws is
unethical, so he makes all of the laws his family owns free. He then
discovers that money still runs the world, since expensive lawyers are
the only ones who know the laws and how to apply them. Story ends with
him deciding that the solution is to get rid of laws entirely.

Story idea: Maddie knew it was going to be a bad day when she saw the
robot and the troll arguing in front of the post office. (The world is
like that of Jack of Shadows; each is looking for a messiah from the
other side, and they eventually decide it's Maddie, but she tells them
off for it---no "chosen one" is going to fix things, they have to.)

Time travel story: your future self gives you everything you'll ever be
able to understand---what do you do with it?

Story idea: "An Orange for My Mother" is about a near-future Toronto
in the throes of collapse. Imported fruit has become rare enough that a
single orange is a birthday present.

Idea: Einstein and other 1920s-era physicists discover that the physical
constants of the universe change over time, and that the Great Old Ones
did once exist. Lovecraft overhears them...

Idea: an extension of the Pauli Exclusion Principle means that any
future you write about can't actually happen, which is why SF has
become so dystopian.

## Beneath Coriandel

A young Shau Sheu and Lady Kembe have some kind of encounter between
then and now.

Some kind of artifact (a coin) appears in every chapter, accumulating
the history?

## Voyage

The Pale Remainder believe that they were created to do jobs under the
earth too nasty for the Angels; they believe humans were created to
provide spare parts for them. Many people worry that there may still be
Pale in underground caverns.

Fishing with remoras.

## Cherne

Smiths and magicians are natural enemies, which is why the Hett are viewed with such suspicion.

Can't use clouds for carrying freight: they have a hard time holding up things they can't drome.
Hold up sleeping passengers requires a skilled pilot.

Use this when soldiers get caught on a ridge, need to be rescued, jumping onto a cloud is a risky thing to do.
- The wizard can keep the prince and the tiger on the cloud using yet another spell (paying yet another price).

Holes created by collapse of the underground chambers of Cherne are unnaturally regular.

## Demon Dragger's Daughter

Girl whose father is kidnapped by anti-magic activists, but it turns out to be a setup.

Includes a public service announcement pooh-poohing the effects of damnation leakage from magical.
- "Some people claim that earthquakes are becoming more common.
  There is absolutely no evidence for this, and even if it *is* happening, it's part of a natural cycle."

Last line: "This is Atlantis."

The Cobra Throne of Thind.

Crocodile-skin armor.

Wherever you go in Cherne, there are signs of former glory; it's as if
all of humanity was growing up in the shadow of more talented older
siblings.

Cherne doesn't have ores, it has metals: there are bronze and brass
mines. Metal must be melted or sawed out of the earth. Other alloys
known in ancient and medieval times include terne (lead with 20% tin and
some antimony) and pewter.

The Parrot Kings of Barra Bantang.

A necklace made from the tiny antlers of deer mice.

Burial rituals: preserve bodies by piercing with straws and desiccating
to wait for the Angels' return, or burn to ensure that the dead can't
be raised again to be punished by the Angels, or alternatively burn to
send the remains up to heaven with the Angels.

Chittermites are small parasites that live in nostrils (the crude call
them "snotgurgles"). It's not fatal, but it *is* disgusting.

Once a year, people in Ensworth dress up like chickens and dance
solemnly around giant nests in their fields. It is dangerous to mock
them for doing this.

There's a hole in the bottom of the sea.

The "cammoth" is a mammoth camel found in the north.

The collapse of Plangentia destroyed the old kingdoms, and brought about
a dark age lasting two centuries or more --- climate change, monsters
released from underground caverns, etc.

The three great forests (Herd of Trees, southwestern, Bantang) are each
made up of a single interlocked tree.

The Thindi are trying to emulate the Uncertain Angels based on scraps of
surviving description --- it has gone from ritual magic to philosophy
to religion and back again several times in the world's history. One
important aspect is that the Uncertain Angels never spoke, but "let
their wishes be known". Under strict interpretation, this means that
aristocrats aren't supposed to talk, which puts a lot of power in the
hands of chamberlains.

Hive crabs cultivate coral to make their nests; the coral gets scraps of
food from the crabs' meals.

France is about a thousand kilometers across. Most kingdoms in
pre-modern times were much smaller than those currently mapped out in
Cherne. Therefore need to introduce some more:
-   More Regimental Kingdoms (twenty-one sounds like a good number,
    although only 15 survive into modern times). Put some islands in the
    Plangent Sea, and call the "kingdom" Plangent-That-Was. Also get
    rid of the name "kingdom", and call it a "command".
-   A buffer state between the Darpani and the Regimental Kingdoms. This
    is the latest in a series: in the north, the sharp drop in the land,
    and the forests, prevent the Darpani from making inroads, but in the
    south, there's a mixed kingdom of descended-from-Darpani nobility
    and Regimental commoners.
-   Some semi-independent kingdoms nested in the Brumosos, west of
    Praczedt. The northernmost is periodically refreshed by escapees
    from Uws; the others survive by providing goods to the Darpani, and
    because the terrain is too mountainous for horses. One of these is
    named after the "three grandmothers" who ran it with iron hands
    for almost a century. Another was founded by Thindi who fled north
    after YS 877.
-   The independent tribes in the Brumosos in Barra Bantang, which are
    too far from the sea for the Twin Admiralcies to bother with.
-   Add a river running southeast from the Brumosos along the border of
    the Karaband (and move the Sea of Glass further west). That can be
    the heart of a trading "kingdom" that is nominally part of Thind,
    but which has been independent for two hundred years. It has now
    broken into several sections, each centered around a major walled
    city. These are loosely federated with the true oases, such as
    Coriandel; the Darpani can't be bothered to conquer them, and the
    Twin Admiralcies see no benefit in provoking the Thindi by ending
    their "useful ambiguity". The people are not truly Thindi; they
    have more in common with their Karabandi counterparts, and there is
    a cultural "revival" under way which recalls the glory days of the
    Ultwaellian Empire that ruled the river valley before the desert
    encroached.
-   Awboon was founded by a Bantangui fleet that went west past Tultin
    Dal rather than fly the flag of the Southern Admiralcy. The
    Regimentals refer to it as the "Pirate Command", and piracy is
    indeed a major part of the local economy.

A "lenwife" is someone who specializes in seeing the souls of the
departed out of the world. Lenwives are found primarily in the
Regimental Kingdoms, Uws, Ruuda, and Praczedt; they are typically young
women (just as midwives are typically matrons). In ideal circumstances,
they show up before the death to help people adjust to the idea of
dying, which reduces the chances of them becoming ghosts, but some
always travel with armies as well.

Thind's rulers call themselves "regents", and (still) claim that they
are governing only until the Angels return. Thind is anti-innovation: if
it wasn't used in Angelic times, they are mostly opposed to it,
although they compromise fairly often when it comes to practical
matters.

Sick Street: a street near the hospital district where people with
interesting diseases hang around waiting to be called in to be used as
examples in lectures. Some of them whisper hints to the students for a
small fee.

It is considered poor form to be Minister of Song (in charge of public
entertainments) for more than six months, because the takings are so
lucrative.

Ruudian story about a Pale Remainder who falls in love with a woman who
loves a mortal man; the Pale cuts off the man's lips and member and
attaches them to himself.

The Spiral Library of Thind's lost capital: built so that books could
be added as they were written, the oldest in the center.

The body is the water, the person is the wave (the pattern); to say that
someone is dead, the Bantangui says, "The waves are still."

Belly oysters (whale symbiotes, much valued for the amber they produce).

"More yellow than gold" is an insult in Ruuda about the depth of
someone's faith.

Raising hats to the sun in prayer.

Cleanliness inherited from the age of Angels.

The lost Thindi colony in southwestern Cherne on the far side of the
land without sleep.

"Worship" of the Angels (prayers for their return) is suppressed
almost everywhere in Cherne; the only place where it's practiced in
modern times is in Thind, and among the Hett.

Sailors in Derway and Bruyere marry their ships.

The extreme southeast is the Sleepless Land (the further in you go, the
less sleep you get; madness from sleep deprivation for those who venture
in too far).

## The Prince and the Cloudherd

Rename characters so highlanders are Indecisia, Procrastinatia, etc.
(Make the book more fun to read...)

Replace father's visit with something dramatic that brings the magician
into the story and explains how magic works.

The theme is "choosing sides"; have to see people doing this for good
and bad reasons right from the start.

Introduce dayglass early on, so that it doesn't come as a surprise when
they are in the tunnel.

Fernando takes the other cloudherds up into the mountains on Pillow and
Old Blue, then brings the clouds back down "just in case". (Explains
why the cloudherds don't just ride up, and gives another taste of
cloudherding life.) Use this as an opportunity to introduce the
lightnings.

Need an adventure scene to get the blood racing: maybe Fernando sees
soldiers on the road (forced out of his way by lightnings on the way
back from the mountains), and they turn out to be the duke's. Some of
the soldiers are on patrol, and they have to be brought back? Or he
flies through a storm to bring the news, and then there's an argument
because people from another village have been harboring a few of the
duke's soldiers, and have a very different idea of what the war is
about. This only works if the prince and/or Sergeant Crimes have already
talked about the reasons for the war.

Describe what the prince is doing while Tahura is having her bad summer.

What's the point of introducing Tahura's father? Why do I need him?
Where is he used? Should that be taken out, and replaced with passing
references to his absence?

What's the point of the reference to Fernando's wife's mother?

## The Bookster's Apprentice

### Magic

Make it clear why the Hett want the Angels back: it is better to be
kicked by a cow that gives milk than by one that doesn't..

Middle book: just as adults face moral issues that children can't
understand, so too do the Angels grapple with things that human beings
won't ever fathom.

The idea that every spell has a price (sometimes a very odd one) isn't
established in this book as early, or as well, as it is in "Beneath
Coriandel". Need to see more quirky behavior in Thomas, with commentary
from Razi about how you can guess the spells that Thomas has cast from
the things he does. It's a whole academic discipline in its own right;
magicians often fake spell prices in order to throw off potential
opponents.

Thomas has to knock on the door of every room he enters. Razi points out
that this is a better bargain than some other magician made, which
required her to let everyone else go through the door first. Her ghost
still haunts the castle, waiting for everyone in the world to pass
through its front gate so that she can leave.

### The Uncertain Angels

The big blurt early on about the world's history doesn't work: it
slows the story down, and is too obviously info-dumping. That
information has to go someplace, though. More importantly, by the time
Thomas reveals that the Hett are trying to revive the last Angel,
readers have to understand why this would be bad.

- Have Thomas or Razi say that human beings were to them what dogs are
  to us; if even one Angel is alive, the world is not really
  humanity's.
- The Hett know this, and are actually looking forward to it: the
  world ruled by their fellow human beings hasn't treated them
  particularly well.

### The Spying Scene

There needs to be one pulse-racing scene early on. (Some readers
disagree, saying that conversation is action enough, but my 15-year-old
audience will probably want something more immediate.) I can smother two
gerbils with one pillow by:

- Eliminating the non-Piaerre-POV scene in which we discover that
  Gaeston and others have beaten Jaromir (while retaining the exchange
  where Elaine says, "That poor man," and Laeuc thinks she's
  referring to Gaeston rather than the Hett).
- Jaromir stumbles over Piaerre in the forest; says he's being
  chased, asks for help; Piaerre points him at a tunnel mouth; Jaromir
  says, "Of course!" (foreshadowing that he knows about the
  tunnels); then Jack, Gaeston, and others arrive on the scene,
  looking for him. They tell Piaerre that Jaromir was spotted spying
  in the village; Piaerre tells them where Jaromir has gone (Gaeston
  asks sharply how Piaerre knows; when Piaerre evades, Gaeston muses
  suggestively that Jaromir must have threatened him); Jaromir is
  caught and beaten.
- The bosun arrives on the scene, and the rest plays out as before
  (but with Piaerre as a witness). They meet Elaiene on their way back
  into Starboard Town. When she chastises her husband, it isn't
  because of any real sympathy with Jaromir: she's just embarrassed
  that *her* husband would get caught up in a brawl.

### Jaromir

Jaromir personifies the doctrinaire Hett. We need to see a *lot* more of
his character in order for this to work. He is as tough as Razi (much
tougher than any of the Avauntois), and has a sense of humor, but his
mission shapes everything. Early, he says things to Piaerre that hint at
stoical zeal; later, when he's interrogating Uyves, he points out that
he never lied, never stole, never hit back when he could have. It
wasn't just because he didn't want to give the game away: it was
because killing is wrong. Then why are the Hett killing? Because
sometimes other things are more wrong. "I'm willing to give my life
for this cause. If it is worth mine, then it is worth others."

### Miscellaneous

- Snails baked into egg bread.
- Exorcists build their shops on bridges (because ghosts don't like
  running water). In the Angels' Fall, where ghosts are more common,
  entire towns are built on bridges.
- When the land floods, fish swim among the fruited branches of the
  trees.
- Dogs are extinct in modern times (after a magical plague two
  centuries ago). This is why people say things like, "You look like
  you've seen a dog!" Not relevant to this story, so take it out:
  replace with things like, "You look like you were just kissed by a
  ghost!"
- At the same time, add more (dumb) beasts: pre-modern towns and
  villages were full of domestic animals.
- Name change: Apcha Bantang becomes Mau Apcha (to be consistent with
  other placenames in Ini Bantang and Barra Bantang).
- Mention the door soldiers (carvings that stand guard beside shop
  doors in Forecastle and elsewhere). The only one in Starboard Town
  is outside Mamaere Mayeule's tavern.
- Get rid of coffee: chocolate is the thing.
- Move the giant hands out of Vaarda and onto the plains, so that
  Piaerre can see them as Avaunt flies by. Use this as the starting
  point for discussion of the Uncertain Angels. (Have the horseman on
  the ground take his nap in the shadow of the hands, instead of
  underneath a tree.) The three paragraphs in the story start with,
  "When the Uncertain Angels ruled the world..."
- When they first see Tinhead, there's a pyramid in the center of
  each square. Klaues is the one who says, "They could be
  otthonkos." Word spreads, and some of the Hett in Forecastle are
  attacked. (Reveals that Klaues does know about his own people's
  legends.)
- "Miraculously, people did." Seems awfully convenient.
- What happens to the Bantangui fan book? Is it dropped in a crate, or
  re-folded and set aside?
- Cut the description of Bantangui calligraphy: not relevant, impedes
  flow.
- Cut (or cut down) description of Piaerre's crib: impedes flow.
- "Whether the captain's wife had detected anything strange in
  Starboard Town." Clumsy foreshadowing.
- Every one of the books mentioned the mountain, but only a few said
  anything more than, "It's big, it flies back and forth, and its
  people have no sense of humor." "Do people really think that about
  us?" Piaerre asked the fourth time he read it. "Oh, la," Razi
  said diplomatically, "They don't know you as well as I do."
- The main square in the Forecastle is called Mapmarket Square. The
  tiles are laid out as a map of Avaunt's progress over Cherne; the
  mountain's path is picked out in coins. Every evening, the chief
  bosun moves a peg showing the mountain's progress.
- Have Vurt grumble that the skull of the first bonescuttle he killed
  was bigger.
- Has Piaerre ever seen a forest fire burning from on high?
- Titles and honorifics: the Avauntois use patrize and patrisse for
  men and women. Uw and daw (uncle and aunt) are affectionate
  honorifics (like "boss") borrowed from Bantangui.
- A banner of snow blown off Avaunt's peak.
- Cutting and drying moss for use in the stinky house.
- Laeuc: "Oh, the Karabandi don't sacrifice chickens. They just
  scold them severely."
- A painting showing a boxer throwing the same punch forever.
- Razi: "We back into the future (must do, because we can see the
  past as we go)."
- A lammergeier is a bearded vulture that eats bones.
- A "saint" is a great scholar, inventor, or engineer. Saint
  Bearnard's Bridge, Saint Ehrm's balm, etc.
- They should swear by the death of all dogs, and by all the clocks
  that ever ticked.
- Queçenne talking about Vurt and Mayeule: old people get cute as they
  shrivel up.
- Spitting seeds over the balcony, watching the cat run up to each one
  in turn to sniff it.
- Vurt: "He's as dumb as a tiger." Piaerre: "But tigers
  aren't---oh."
- Steps of the Hardeck worn smooth by a waterfall of feet.
- Piaerre feels guilty about outgrowing his parents (particularly his
  father) intellectually, but doesn't want to stop it happening.
- "Malefit" is the opposite of "benefit".
- Avaunt needs more geography: ought to be at least one stone bridge
  across a ravine, and places where pulleys have been anchored to the
  rock to help Starboard Towners move loads from the Hardeck.
- A pattern on silk called "peacock's tears".
- The problem with books is that they can't change their minds.
- The hurt you get in the back of your throat when you're trying to
  stop yourself from crying.
- Feeding dyed grain to chickens to make them lay colored eggs (a
  story Laeuc told Piaerre when his son was young; Piaerre still has
  the egg).
- "That's like asking which side of a coin is the 'real' one."
  (Razi talking about who's right and who's wrong.)
- Some houses in the Forecastle have a "door soldier" (a large doll)
  by the front door: Enswer tradition.
- Jack the Parrot threatening to cake on someone's head. (Use
  "cake" more frequently, and have Piaerre get in trouble for using
  it.)
- "He could already feel Fraederiq's hands around his throat..."
  Feels "unearned": need to foreshadow Fraederiq as a bully before
  this.
- "Two thoughts chased each other..." Get inside Piaerre's head a
  little more here: have him remember some of Fraederiq's past
  mocking and bullying, so that readers can understand his indecision.
- "He could only guess how many hours Vaszlav had spent
  badgering..." Important character development point, but feels
  rushed.
- "A narrow bed and a polished teak dresser..." Move this detail
  up, so that it's better integrated.
- "...wondering in its little mind" Shift the POV.
- "Vurt was on his verandah, cursing in a flat monotone..." Seems
  to shift the POV to Vurt (needs to be Piaerre). Subsequent
  conversation slows the pace down.
- "weeping compass" only works if we already know that "weeping"
  is a curse.
- "A moment later, Vurt heard..." Another POV shift.
- "Piaerre stared at the map. The Brumosos curved..." Get inside
  Piaerre's head here: does he think that Fraederiq will never see
  this again? Or is that too maudlin?
- Mention somewhere that the mountain affects the weather around it
  (but less than the Avauntois think).
- "It didn't seem right, practicing verbs...but he couldn't think
  of anything else to do." Again, too passive: makes Piaerre an
  anti-hero.
- "Today you will finish with those deeds, yes?" Use "ledgers",
  and make it clear that these are things Piaerre was assigned
  earlier.
- "La, but enough of books for one evening." Have Piaerre be
  frustrated by Razi closing the topic, to express the reader's
  frustration at being teased.
- "...only for gallops for Jack the parrot..." Sounds strange,
  since parrots don't gallop.
- Change "nameday" to "naming day" (and have people use saints in
  their swearing earlier).
- "By my eyes, a dozen rabbits..." Need a better segue into this,
  so that it's clear the omniscient/reflective bit is over.
- "People falling from a great height..." Too obvious.
- "I do," Piaerre blurted. Piaerre is betraying Razi in a small way
  by spilling the beans here. It needs to be more dramatic: is Piaerre
  doing it because solidarity with his fellow Avauntois takes
  precedence over his relationship with his teacher? The scene shift
  at the end (Thomas's arrival) gets Piaerre and the reader out of
  dealing with the consequences---maybe better to stick with them a
  little longer?
- Papere Vurt snorted. "Looks a lot safer than what I rode up on."
  He needs to make a comment that makes it clear he understands the
  game Thomas is playing, but is willing to go along for his
  grandson's sake (or because he doesn't quite trust Razi?).
- "Razi and Thomas were already on board." They're very flat here:
  need the scene to crackle with tension between them to make it clear
  that while they are very reluctant allies, they will put their
  differences aside and actually work together.
- "The tunnels!" Piaerre exclaimed, pointing at the image in the
  window. This is too early: he already figures out the tunnels in a
  later scene.
- "Was it---who dropped it off?" Piaerre needs to be a little more
  shocked by the (presumed) theft at this point. Later, he briefly
  entertains the notion of keeping it (since he didn't steal it
  himself), but even as he thinks it, he knows he's just playing with
  the idea.
- "First, lie my Razi on his back." Why can she see him now, when
  she couldn't see him when Piaerre spoke to her the first time?
- "...and grabbed the window ledge." He needs to be clumsy here:
  he's still adjusting to his numb hand. Need to comment on it a few
  more times later, and then have him do something when he gets back
  to Starboard Town without even realizing (at first) that he's
  compensating for the numbness.
- "But what about the rest of our things?" Piaerre's first question
  ought to be about Starboard Town and his family.
- "It took them half an hour..." Piaerre should be noticing how
  clumsy his hand is during this half hour.
- "A piece of cake?" Doesn't work if "cake" is an obscenity.
- "...he couldn't even hate himself properly for having frozen
  again." Scene is too sparse to have any real emotional impact. It
  should have more adrenalin; he should blame his numb hand (and
  immediately hate himself for the lie). This is also where we first
  find out that he thinks at some level that helping Razi ought to
  have squared what happened with Fraederiq.
- "The bookster spread his his hands. 'La, nothing that hasn't
  already, I think.'" Razi is nonchalant about the Hett invasion,
  but Piaerre wouldn't be. Would Iseulle?
- Vurt's ladder: needs to have been reassembled and used (by the
  fleeing families) before Piaerre et al return to Starboard Town.
- "Idjen cakhuisa." The bosun, Jaromir, and Piaerre are together,
  just as they were at the beginning of the story: should use this
  echo somehow.
- "I'll be a haunt before you'll be his anything." Make it clear
  here that what Elaiene's upset about is the impropriety:
  appearances instinctively take precedence in her mind over anything
  else.
- "How many bushels of squash did we grow each year?" Piaerre has to
  say that he lied (though he doesn't know how much good it will do,
  given how much they obviously already know). Can't afford for him
  to be seen as a collaborator.
- When Gaeston calls Piaerre a leech, Piaerre has to feel the
  injustice of it---remember, he lied to the Hett.
- Piaerre's conversation with Jaromir about the library (which
  Jaromir calls the birbetke): the story has suddenly stepped back
  from Piaerre's thoughts. Need to keep it close: need to know what
  Piaerre is feeling as Jaromir tries to be friendly.
- "They got Iseulle to bed eventually." Even in shock, she wouldn't
  be this passive.

## Eimin in Medef: To Do

Do a shorter version (35,000 words, same level as "Bottle of Light").
Opening is, "My name is Eimin. If you want to understand my story, you
need to know three things. The first is that I'm Aphsi. The second is
that I'm nif, and I'm not going to tell you the third just yet."

Long introduction about Listening isn't used later; foreshadows
Eimin's decision to become a "counselor", but that doesn't happen
for another two books. Start with him cutting his thumb?

Why does droming prevent them from killing animals, but not from being
thieves?

"teasing or having fun" should be "teasing or tormenting"

Why is it so important to Eimin to play white?

More description/explanation of the gargoyles---they prey on the
herds, and "normal" Aphsi can't do anything about them.

Why is it such a big deal to Suresh that magicians are making Aphsi nif?

Sun goggles, not sunglasses.

Check ages: it's four years later, if it's his fourteenth birthday.

Can't Hediyeh drome Suresh's intentions in the pool?

The palace is really a villa, left over from the Clockwork Kings. Music
plays in it all the time.

Eimin walked two days each way to see the fleet in the glass.

Razi's quicksilver sword can't be scratched.

Grappa Uzman is the goatherd.

Little Ashwara is a neighbor's baby who is learning how to walk.

You don't "give someone your name", you "share it" (Suresh's
mistake).

Razi's group is called the Other Hand.

Lady Kembe in Ossisswe is the Aphsi's friend.

Eimin tried being a carpenter for a while, and made a lopsided table.

Eimin goes out to the fleet to prove that he's brave, but discovers
no-one cares.

The fat nif boy is named Youssein.

A scene where he hikes out to look at the fish with Youssein.

The "woman in black" is a senior member of the Other Hand. She had a
pair of magic gloves: when she's wearing one, the other mimics its
movements.

Eimin decides to hike out to the fishing fleet on his own after (a)
no-one but his parents and Youssein remembers his birthday, and (b)
Suresh tells him that nif are made, not born. (Eimin spills to Suresh on
his birthday, which prompts the confidence.)

## From the Sierra Club Guide to the Sierra Nevadas

Vegetation often grows in the joints between rocks, so that there are
straightlines of grasses and bushes.

A *nunatak* is a small island of rock in a glacier.

Staircase (or paternoster) lakes form in glacial valleys: one small lake
feeds into the next, which is down a rock step, which in turn feeds into
the next, and so on.

The air is significantly cooler in the shade --- even a single cloud
going by can chill things.

Wind blows upslope during the day (as valley air is heated), then
downslope during the night (as peak air cools).

Mountain crests are often capped with clouds; white cumulus clouds with
flat bottoms and rounded tops often "pop" with their bottoms at the
same level.

"Rotten snow" is snow that is full of cavities carved by running water
(from partial melting).

Sudden thunderstorms are common in summer: sheet lightning and fork
lightning are both common as well.

In the winter, thin-barked trees can crack because of ice build-up, with
a sound like a gun.

Needle ice forms in the ground in wet soil exposed to very cold air.

Snow banners often form streamers from peaks (wind blowing snow off the
peak).

Many trees at higher elevations have "pistol butt" trunks from being
dragged downslope by snow when young.

Jackrabbits grow fur on the soles of their feet, both for insulation and
to act as snowshoes.

The branches on sequoias can be bigger than most trees.

## Poetry

> 1. Don't see him. Don't phone or write a letter.
> 2. The easy way: get to know him better.
> - Wendy Cope: "Two cures for Love"

> Western wind when wilt thou blow
> The small rain down can rain
> Christ if my love were in my arms
> And I in my bed again

> "A Late Wedding Anniversary Poem"
> Knowing time's short in the rush
> hours of breakfasts with children to crush
> into coats and partings to brush
> 
> I tucked your second-best bra
> in over the radiator
> 
> So that hurrying to dress
> you might almost feel me press
> a warm hand around each breast
> 
> - Michael Laskey

> Days I have held
>
> days I have lost
>
> days that outgrew, like daughters
>
> my harbouring arms
>
> - Derek Walcott

## From How Buildings Learn

The world "building" contains the double reality. It means both "the
action of the verb BUILD" and "that which is built".

Quoting O'Neill's "A Hierarchical Concept of Ecosystems": Most
interaction is within the same pace level---hummingbirds and flowers
pay attention to each other, oblivious to redwoods, who are oblivious to
them. The insight is this: "The dynamics of the system will be
dominated by the slow components, with the rapid components simply
following along."

Later, "it is at the times of major changes in a system that the quick
processes can most influence the slow."

"Form follows failure."

Quoting Illich, "History gives us distance from the present, as if it
were the future of the past."

## The Marionite Heresy

The Marionite heresy is this: once, before time and the universe began,
there was God. Something went wrong; we don't know --- we *can't*
know --- what or why, but somehow God shattered into a myriad tiny
fragments. Each of us today embodies one of those fragments; we call
them souls. Our highest purpose in life is to fit those fragments one
against another, to put the jigsaw puzzle back together and re-create
God. You know how it feels when you meet someone, and it's like you've
known him/her all your life? That's one of your adjacent pieces
slipping into place.

The point of this all is, pieces in a jigsaw puzzle don't just fit
together in pairs. Each piece can fit many others, in different ways.
That's why the romantic notion "for each of us, there's one other"
is wrong. For each of us, there's lots of different others, but the
number is very small compared with the number of people in the world.

(And Jenny said, "But I change shape over time...")

People learn indigenous languages because there isn't enough written material
to train LLMs.

A society where women's ears are put out to deafen them (metaphor for genital
mutilation and other forms of abuse).

Only gay people can do magic - can orientation change over time?

You know you're in a simulation because you never have to go to the bathroom:
nobody wanted to code that bit.

> 1.  Never use a metaphor, similar or other figure of speech which you
>     are used to seeing in print.
> 2.  Never use a long word when a short one will do.
> 3.  If it is possible to cut a word out, always cut it out.
> 4.  Never use the passive where you can use the active.
> 5.  Never use a foreign phrase, a scientific word or a jargon word if
>     you can think of an everyday English equivalent.
> 6.  Break any of these rules sooner than say anything barbarous.
> 
> (from Orwell's Politics and the English Language, 1947)

Ducklings tumbling down an Arctic cliff: a few are injured, but that's
OK, because it distracts the foxes from the ones that aren't.

New story: a family "whaling" for bio-rich asteroids in the cold dark
of space. The colony ship arrived just a few years after an asteroid hit
the planet they were supposed to settle; the ship itself is now a
crowded bazaar, while clans sail the darkness in makeshift spaceships.
No biotech: that's what destroyed the home world. The only pets in
space are the turtles; your status in the city is shown by the pet you
keep.

A dozen laptop drives sound like an old kettle just starting to bubble.

"I think," Tehanu said in her soft, strange voice, "That when I die,
I can breathe back the breath that made me live. I can give back to the
world all that I didn't do. All that I might have been and couldn't
be. All the choices I didn't make. All the things I lost and spent and
wasted. I can give them back to the world. To the lives that haven't
been lived yet. That will be my gift back to the world that gave me the
life I did live, the life I loved, the breath I breathed." (Ursula
LeGuin, "The Other Wind")

Mister Chance and Doctor Certainty.

Story starts with a man daydreaming about his childhood friend hopping
up onto the railing of a bridge, turning to brag, slipping, and falling.
It never actually happened, but it haunts him nevertheless.

Mata-mata turtle has red "worms" around mouth.

Porcupines can kill tigers.

Elephants put dead crocodiles in trees (they really do; no-one knows
why).

...The reason we like the problem of racism is that solving it just
requires us to give up our prejudices, whereas solving the problem of
economic inequality might require something more---it might require us
to give up our money. When student and faculty activists struggle for
cultural diversity, they are in large part battling over what skin color
the rich kids should have. As long as we think that our best
universities are fair if they are appropriately diverse, we don't have
to worry that most people can't go to them. (NYT, April 2004)

Lick the tip of a finger, then dab at a hair to pick it up.

Fortune telling using dice: put twelve in a box, shake it, and see what
pattern the irregular images on the dice faces forms.

A kindergarten pupil told his teacher he'd found a cat, but it was
dead. "How do you know that the cat was dead?" she asked her pupil.
"Because I pissed in its ear and it didn't move," answered the child
innocently. "You did WHAT?!?" the teacher exclaimed in surprise. "You
know," explained the boy, "I leaned over and went 'Pssst!' and it
didn't move."

A small boy is sent to bed by his father. Five minutes
later....."Da-ad...." "What?" "I'm thirsty. Can you bring drink
of water?" "No, You had your chance. Lights out." Five minutes later:
"Da-aaaad....." "WHAT?" "I'm THIRSTY. Can I have a drink of
water??" "I told you NO! If you ask again, I'll have to spank you!!"
Five minutes later......"Daaaa-aaaad....." "WHAT!" "When you
come in to spank me, can you bring a drink of water?"

One summer evening during a violent thunderstorm a mother was tucking
her son into bed. She was about to turn off the light when he asked with
a tremor in his voice, "Mommy, will you sleep with me tonight?" The
mother smiled and gave him a reassuring hug. "I can't dear," she
said. "I have to sleep in Daddy's room." A long silence was broken at
last by his shaky little voice: "The big sissy."

How wonderful a good map is, in which one views the world as from
another world thanks to the art of drawing. (Samuel van Hoogstraten, in
Svetlana Alpers' "The Art of Drawing")

Spice temples

Religious proscription on eating food prepared by strangers

Death is the fifth season (the other four are the circle of life).

Golden carrion ants (like the vultures that devour dead Parsis).
- They ignore the flesh of the living
- Horror scene where narrator realizes they have started to feast on him.

Tattooing the name of your enemy on the soles of your feet.

"Talk is cheap because supply exceeds demand."

Tuyuca requires verb-endings on statements to show how the speaker knows something.
- "Diga ape-wi" means that "the boy played soccer (I know because I saw him)",
  while "diga ape-hiyi" means "the boy played soccer (I assume)".
- English can provide such information, but for Tuyuca that is an obligatory ending on the verb.
- Evidential languages force speakers to think hard about how they learned what they say they know.

In the end, he was accused only of theft, arson, rape, and murder, the more serious charges having been stayed.

Upon the dedication of St. Paul's Cathedral, Queen Anne described it as "awful, pompous, and artificial"
which in those days meant "awe-inspiring, imposing, and artistically done."

giant interstellar alien thinks the humans on a generation ship are parasites

father asks daughter "why didn't we ever make a robot?" and she says "because you were always too busy"

robot picks up message from aliens after humans have gone extinct, finds out the sender is in the same situation

reverse Pinocchio: a robot who decides to make a daughter
- robots who make people are called boymakers because it's a crime to make a girl (they can make more people)
- a story about gender identity

the reveal is that _we're_ the "elder gods"
- character says "we missed the gods so much we made new ones"

the Yith are trapped in an elaborate Matrix-style simulation

Implants at birth (or even before) so that the brain can use them
(same is true of magic swords? have to grow up with it so it's an extension of yourself?)

like "Lady Astronaut" but for tech: women always stayed in control

Azolla event

story about contraband videos of wildlife

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_Long_Jump was a plan to assassinate
Churchill, Stalin, and Roosevelt simultaneously

Time travel but you have to go so far forward or back that you can't change anything

Buddhist reincarnated as computer program

Dungeons as waste dumps for magic

The last streetcar

Dip snails in paint to make art: http://boingboing.net/2015/05/05/make-snail-art-by-dipping-them.html

Butterflies drink turtle tears to get salt in the desert

Wasps that make nests out of flower petals

Elephant with [tentacles instead of a tusk](http://io9.com/there-is-a-long-tradition-of-elephants-and-horror-i-ap-932586752).

Not "cui bono?" but "quis statuat?" (who decides?)

A story:

> One day an old dog gets lost on the plains discovers that he's lost.
> Wandering about, he notices a leopard heading rapidly in his direction
> with the intention of having lunch.
>
> The old dog thinks, "Oh, oh! I'm in deep doo-doo now!" Noticing
> some bones on the ground close by, he immediately settles down to chew
> on the bones with his back to the approaching cat. Just as the leopard
> is about to leap the old dog exclaims loudly, "Boy, that was one
> delicious leopard! I wonder if there are any more around here?"
>
> Hearing this, the young leopard halts his attack in mid-strike, a look
> of terror comes over him and he slinks away into the trees.
>
> "Whew!" says the leopard, "That was close! That old dog nearly had
> me!"
>
> Meanwhile, a monkey who had been watching the whole scene from a
> nearby tree, figures he can put this knowledge to good use and trade
> it for protection from the leopard.
>
> So off he goes, but the old dog sees him heading after the leopard
> with great speed, and figures that something must be up. The monkey
> soon catches up with the leopard, spills the beans and strikes a deal
> for himself with the leopard.
>
> The young leopard is furious at being made a fool of and says, "Here,
> monkey, hop on my back and see what's going to happen to that
> conniving canine!"
>
> Now, the old dog sees the leopard coming with the monkey on his back
> and thinks, "What am I going to do now?", but instead of running,
> the dog sits down with his back to his attackers, pretending he
> hasn't seen them yet, and just when they get close enough to hear,
> the old dog says: "Where's that damn monkey? I sent him off an hour
> ago to bring me another leopard!"

He spent the morning carefully cleaning the death off the floor and furniture.

From Alberto Manguel's The Library at Night:
-   Quoting Blake: "There is a Moment in each Day that Satan cannot
    find // Nor can his Watch Fiends find it, but the industrious find
    // This Moment & it multiply, & when it once is found // It
    renovates every Moment of the Day if rightly placed."
-   In one other practical sense, words create light. The Mesopotamian
    who wished to continue his reading when night had fallen, the Roman
    who itnended to pursue his documents after dinner, the monk in his
    cell and the scholar in his study after evening prayers, the
    courtier retiring to his bedchamber and the lady to her boudoir, the
    child hiding beneath the blankets to read after curfew---all set
    up the light necessary to illuminate their task.
-   In her novel The Blue Flower, Penelope Fitzgerald says, "If a story
    begins with finding, it must end with searching."

The ancients thought that the only "proper" fractions were ones that
had 1 as a numerator; fractions like 2/3 are still called "vulgar
fractions". They would write 2/3 as 1/2 + 1/6.

Practicing her ceremonial scowl.

> As every man goes through life he fills in a number of forms for the
> record, each containing a number of questions... There are thus
> hundreds of little threads radiating from every man, millions of threads
> in all. If these threads were suddenly to become visible, the whole sky
> would look like a spider's web, and if they materialized as rubber
> bands, buses; trams and even people would all lose the ability to move,
> and the wind would be unable to carry torn-up newspapers or autumn
> leaves along the streets of the city. They are not visible, they are not
> material, but every man is constantly aware of their existence... Each
> man, permanently aware of his own invisible threads, naturally develops
> a respect for the people who manipulate the threads.
>
> - Alexander Solzhenitsyn, Cancer Ward, 1968

Marching in snow makes your back ache.

"Knowledge is power; power corrupts; so anyone who has studied as hard as I have is bound to be evil."

Being poor is:
- hoping the toothache goes away.
- knowing your kid goes to friends' houses but never has friends over to yours.
- living right next to the outhouses.
- wondering if your well-off sibling is lying when he says he doesn't mind when you ask for help.
- knowing you can't leave money on the table when your friends are around.
- stealing meat from the store,
  frying it up before your mom gets home and then telling her she doesn't have make dinner tonight
  because you're not hungry anyway.
- not enough space for everyone who lives with you.
- relying on people who don't give a damn about you.
- finding the letter your mom wrote to your dad, begging him for the child support.
- taking a broken lamp from a stranger's trash.
- making lunch for your kid when a cockroach skitters over the bread,
  and you looking over to see if your kid saw.
- people eyeing you when you walk around in the market.
- not taking the job because you can't find someone you trust to watch your kids.
- the police busting into the room right next to yours.
- not talking to that girl because she'll probably just laugh at your clothes.
- hoping someone will invite you for dinner on holidays.
- people thinking they know something about you by the way you talk.
- crying when you drop the porridge on the floor.
- knowing you work as hard as anyone, anywhere.
- people surprised to discover you're not actually stupid.
- people surprised to discover you're not actually lazy.
- never buying anything someone else hasn't bought first.
- having to live with choices you didn't know you made when you were fourteen.
- getting tired of people wanting you to be grateful.
- knowing you're being judged.
- people who have never been poor wondering why you choose to be so.

A freelance bargaineer.

Baked cat puke is really hard to get off.

The witch waved her magic spoon.

Put fig juice in milk to curdle it when making cheese.

As he listed the points he was supposed to be remember, he took the rings off his fingers one by one.

Refer to children as "colts" instead of "kids".

A professional cheese namer.

One character has never encountered sausages before; the other starts to
explain what they are ("Yes, it's meat... No, it's not some kind of
slug..."), and then a third guesses (wrongly) and starts sniggering.

"Symposium" literally means "drinking together".

Carving seals (for stamping wax) is a tightly-regulated profession.

He lay under the covers and waited for his soul to soak back into his body
(or for his body to reabsorb his soul).

Story opening: As he fell, he cried out, "They pushed me!" And as he
hit the ground, he thought, "I hope this works."

Statuettes of evil spirits being beaten put near doorways to frighten
bad luck away.
