<section markdown="1">

## Chapter 9: Into the Blight

Noxy hadn't realized just how many soldiers were in Apple Bridge until
she saw them all standing at attention in rows in the front courtyard.
She started counting, but stopped when Mope said, "Eighty, plus
Sergeant Inambu and her two apprentices, and Erasmus over there. He's
not part of the troop's regulation fighting strength any more, not
since he lost that leg, but he keeps the horses happy."

The prince stood in front of his troops with Sergeant Gyalpa beside
him. He looked relaxed to Noxy, but if she had been closer, she would
have been able to see that he was drumming his fingers on the hilt of
his sword. His plumed helmet made him look older, and stern. The
yellow feathers on its crest, and the yellow ribbons on his sleeve,
reminded her of how Sergeant Dorbu had looked the day he had arrived
in Stale, four years ago. For a moment she felt a lump in her
throat.

At a nod from Sergeant Gyalpa, Prince Thokmay stepped forward. "You all
know where we're going," he said loudly, deliberately roughening his
voice so that it wouldn't break. "And you all know why, and what we
might run into. If any of you would rather spend a year in the
galleys, now's the time to say so." He waited a moment. "Very well,
then. Sergeant?"

"Your Highness?"

The prince waved at the men standing to his right. "These four squads
will come with us. We'll leave the other four here with Sergeant
Inambu."

"Yes, Your Highness," the sergeant replied.

"Dismiss the troops," the prince ordered.

The sergeant straightened up. "Atten*tion!* Saaaa*lute!*" As one, the
soldiers thumped their right fist against their chest and roared
"Loghan preserved!". The sergeant led those the prince had selected
toward the stables, while the others split off in twos and threes to
return to their duties.

The prince walked across the cobblestone courtyard to Mope and Noxy,
tucking his helmet under his arm as he did so. He ran his fingers over
his short, wiry hair as if to dry it. "How did I do?" he asked Mope,
his voice cracking.

"Well enough, I think, Your Highness," the troll reassured him.

"Are you sure it's wise to take so few, Your Highness?" a soft voice
asked from behind Noxy. She jumped, startled. Sergeant Inambu was
standing behind her. "It is, after all, your sister."

"My father would want me to deal with this like a soldier," the prince
said to her evenly, "Not like a frightened child. Anything could
happen if I leave too few here to guard the town." He studied the
magician for a moment. "Are you…all right?"

Sergeant Inambu nodded. "Yes, Your Highness. At least, I will be. But
please, take both of my apprentices. I think I'll be able to take care
of whatever might happen here in your absence."

"Of course," the prince said. "Thank you." He turned to Noxy. "I'm
sorry to run away like this," he said, trying to smile as his voice
broke on the word 'run'. "I hope you understand."

"Of course," she said. On a sudden impulse she stepped toward him. His
eyes widened. She hesitated, her sudden courage gone, then settled for
punching his arm gently. "Blue skies, and a safe journey," was all she
said.

It took the prince until the middle of the afternoon to reach the
Blight. The squad at the rear would speed up to gallop past the
others, then slow to a trot once they were in front to let the next
squad ride past. The prince tried to stay calm, and not think about
what might be happening to his sister, but every time he rode past
Sergeant Gyalpa he couldn't help but ask, "Anything?" Every time, the
sergeant said, "Nothing, Your Highness."

There were no markers on the edge of the Blight, no walls or signs to
show where the magically-poisoned land began. Prince Thokmay only
realized they were in it when he saw a patch of flowers that had been
turned into glass. He turned in his saddle to stare, then heard a
crunching sound underneath him as his horse stepped on some grass that
had been transformed the same way.

"You'll want to watch out for that, Your Highness," Manpa
said. "Bucket's hooves are tough, but they're not so tough that they
can't be cut."

"I'll be careful," the prince promised. He looked around. "I haven't
seen any birds for a while."

"Nor you won't, Your Highness. There's not many that'll come here that
weren't born here. Same as the people, like."

The prince nodded. "I can understand why. Come on, let's keep
going. It will be dark soon, and we're still four miles from the
hill."

The further they road, the bleaker the land became. Scraggly
blackberry bushes hunched down when they heard the soldiers
approaching, while the knee-high grass had a metallic green sheen,
like an summer fly's body, and made a scraping sound like rusty
scissors when the wind brushed over it. The few trees they passed were
stunted, and the apples hanging from them were blackened, or bloated
to the size of pumpkins. Even the sky above them was somehow
twisted. It seemed normal enough when Prince Thokmay looked straight at
it, but he kept seeing swirls of color sweep through it out of the
corner of his eye.

They came up over a small rise and saw a wooden 'X' propped up on
either side of the road. Each was tall as a mounted man's head, and
the rain had long since washed away whatever paint might once have
been on them. The prince swallowed as he rode between them. He knew
from the soldiers' stories that these markers had once stood at the
edge of the Blight. Now they were two hours' ride inside it.

The sun had sunk into the horizon like a rotten peach into mud when
one of the soldiers from the lead squad came galloping back to the
prince. "Your Highness!" he shouted. "There's men up ahead, lots of
'em. The sergeant says to go slow."

"Understood," the prince said crisply. "Tell Sergeant Gyalpa that
we'll be with him as quickly as we can." The soldier turned and
galloped back the way he'd come. The prince drew his sword and laid it
across his lap. Around him, his soldiers did the same, making much the
same sound as the metal grass had made. He took a deep breath, held it
for a second, then spurred his horse to a trot.

Prince Thokmay expected to find the smugglers waiting at the top of a
hill, or on the far side of a stream. His teachers had told him over
and over again how important it was to make use of whatever defenses
the ground offered. Instead, they were gathered around the stump of
what must have once been an enormous tree. Eight or nine were mounted
on mean-looking horses, while twice that number with spears and swords
were on foot beside them.

The prince reined in his horse next to Sergeant Gyalpa, about a
hundred yards away from the smugglers. "Is that your man Mukh, Your
Highness?" the sergeant asked, pointing to the skinny figure atop the
only one of the smugglers' horses that looked like it had eaten a
decent meal in the last month.

"That's him," the prince said. "Do they have bows?"

"Not that I can see, Your Highness. Rinpa! Can you see any archers
among them?" the sergeant called.

The soldier squinted for a moment, then called back, "No, sergeant,
not a one."

Sergeant Gyalpa studied the smugglers a moment longer. "I don't like
it, Your Highness," he said. "There's forty of us, all mounted,
against two dozen of them, and most of theirs are on foot. Why are
they just waiting for us?"

"There's only one way to find out," the prince said, hoping he sounded
braver than he felt. He started to spur his horse forward, but before
he could, Sergeant Gyalpa backed his own mount into the prince's way.

The sergeant glanced around, then sidled his horse closer to the
prince so that their heads were only a couple of feet apart. "You've
not been in a battle before, have you, Your Highness? Not with a sword
in your hands."

The prince shook his head. "No, sergeant. I don't suppose you'd call
what happened at Stale a battle."

The sergeant nodded. "Right, then I'd be grateful if you'd stay close
to me, Your Highness, and hang back if there's any excitement. Your
father would have my ears off if I let you get killed by a bunch of
featherless ducks like this lot."

"Yes, sergeant." The prince cleared his throat. "Shall we?"

The soldiers spread out as they rode forward. They were still about
fifty yards away from the smugglers when Mukh raised his
arm. "Hello, hello!" he called. "So glad you could come."

"I am Thokmay Loghan-o Prince," the prince said loudly, hoping that his
voice wouldn't crack, and that he would be brave if battle came. "I am
looking for my sister, the Princess Ogmin. We fear she has been
abducted."

The man on the ground beside Mukh was wagging a finger slowly at the
soldiers. He frowned and tugged at Mukh's pantleg and said something
that the prince couldn't hear.

Mukh straightened up and frowned in turn. "Where are the rest of
your troops?" he asked. "It's such a nice day, I hope they're not
cooped up washing dishes." A few of his men laughed.

"Never mind the dishes," the prince demanded. "Do you know what has
become of Her Highness?"

"Oh, yes, the princess," Mukh called back. "About this tall?" He put
his hand up around his chin, palm flat. "Long hair?"

"What have you done with her?" the prince demanded.

"Oh, nothing, nothing," the smuggler said. "Just given her a haircut."
The men around him started to laugh. One of them reached over and
picked something up off the stump.

"Looks like… braids, Your Highness," Manpa said, squinting again.

"Yes, they're braids," Mukh said, as though he'd been able to hear
the soldier even though there were fifty yards between them. "Show
them what else you have, Harry."

The smuggler put down the cut-off braids, and held up a roll of blue
ribbon. "You do recognize it, yes, Your Highness? Eighteen, yes, it
was eighteen pence a handspan, wasn't it?" The men around him laughed
again, harder.

Sergeant Gyalpa swore under his breath. "We've been tricked, Your
Highness," he said. "They must've known we'd use magic to find the
princess."

"Yes, well, it only seemed reasonable," Mukh called. This time the
prince was sure that the smuggler had heard them. "I thought of
pulling out her fingernails too, in case you tried to use clippings
instead of hair, but I was sure you'd keep too a neat a house for
that."

"If you've hurt her—" the prince choked.

"Oh no, no, no," the smuggler protested. "*I* would never hurt an
innocent child—not unless I had to, of course. But we don't even
*have* the princess, do we?" He twisted around in his saddle to look
at his men. "Do we?"

"No," they said, and "Nawp," and "Uh uh."

"What do you want?" Sergeant Gyalpa asked loudly.

The smile dropped from Mukh's thin face. He spurred his horse
forward a few paces. Prince Thokmay noticed that he was holding his
mount's reins in his right hand, and something else in his lap with
his left. "I want you and your troops to leave Apple Bridge," he
said. "By tomorrow. For good."

The prince scowled. "You know we can't do that."

The smuggler beamed. "Of course you can—you're a prince! Well, half
a prince these days, from what I hear, but a prince nonetheless."

"He can't be serious, Your Highness," Sergeant Gyalpa muttered. "Even
if we did leave, the king would have half his army down here before
the harvest started."

The prince nodded. "Why should we leave Apple Bridge?" he said in a
normal tone of voice. "If you don't have my sister, what reason would
we have?"

"You might do it just to be friendly," Mukh said, then snickered.

The prince shook his head. "I'm sorry, but I don't think I want to
have a friend like you. Even if I did, I couldn't oblige you. Apple
Bridge is part of Loghan."

"Not for long," Mukh said lightly. He picked up a small bag that was
hanging from his saddle horn. "Not for very long at all."

"It's magic!" one of the apprentices shouted. "I can feel it!"

"Loghan!" Sergeant Gyalpa bellowed. He dug his heels into his horse.
The soldiers around him shouted, "Loghan and the dawn!" and charged.

Mukh paused for just a moment, watching them come at him with a
satisfied look on his face. Then he undid the string that held the bag
closed and shook it out. A terrible roaring sound filled the prince's
ears as a tornado came whirling out of the bag.

</section>
<section markdown="1">

## Chapter 10: I Know the Bear

Noxy watched Prince Thokmay and the soldiers ride away with an empty
feeling in her stomach, as if the bottom of the world had dropped
away. Unable to think of anything better to do, she went back in the
house and up the stairs to Princess Ogmin's room. She told herself
that she was going to see whether she could cheer Dolly up. If she had
been a few years younger or older, she would have known that she was
really looking for some cheer herself.

As she walked down the polished wooden floor toward the princess's
room, she heard muffled voices ahead. She slowed down. One of them was
Mope's, and the other was Dolly's. She hesitated. The door wasn't
actually closed, not all the way, she told herself. It wouldn't really
be eavesdropping…

"—ighness what you know. If you don't, I will!" she heard Dolly say
angrily. "Who knows what she could do to the princess?"

"Nothing half as bad as what *they'll* do to *her* if they even
suspect that she has something to do with Her Highness's
disappearance," Mope replied. "You know how people around here treat
us, what they think of us. She could have nothing to do with this, and
they'd still hunt her down like an animal."

"The prince would never do something like that," Dolly said firmly.

"What about Inambu?" Mope asked. "She'd do it without a second
thought!"

They both froze as Noxy pushed the door open. Mope's rubbery lips were
pulled back in a snarl, exposing more strong, yellow teeth than Noxy
would have imagined he could have. Dolly's face was no happier.

"I wouldn't," she said firmly. "Whatever it is, I wouldn't do it. So
why don't you tell me what's going on?"

"And don't say, 'Tell you what?'," Noxy warned him as he started to
speak.

Mope hesitated. "If you don't tell her, I will," Dolly said, as if
Mope was a badly-behaved child.

The younger troll sighed. "I know the bear," he said reluctantly.
"The one from the market, Rust—I recognized her from mother's
description. She's—she's involved in politics. Just like me," he
added, as if daring Noxy to laugh or criticize.

"What kind of politics?" Noxy asked.

"The right kind," Mope said.

"The *noisy* kind," his mother said at the same instant.

Mope sighed. "You'd be noisy too if someone was using my hide for a
rug," he told his mother. "At least, I hope you would." Dolly just
sniffed.

"Rust had a son," Mope said to Noxy. "An ungifted son, just a plain,
ordinary bear cub. Some hunters found him in the woods one day. She
tried to take them to court afterward, but killing an animal isn't
murder."

"So she—she had them tried for *theft*," he continued, with so much
raw bitterness in his voice that Noxy was afraid of him, "But they
wouldn't even give her that. Gifted animals aren't allowed to own
other animals in Loghan."

"Was—was Princess Ogmin one of the hunters?" Noxy asked.

"What? Oh, no, no, Her Highness wouldn't hurt a fly," Mope said
dismissively. "But the king makes the laws in Loghan, and I'm
afraid…"

He paused. "You understand I want the same things as Rust, don't you?"
he asked. "The same things that you, and every other human, has from
birth. I want to be able to run a shop without having a human sign a
license saying that I'm not rabid. I want to be able to buy books
without the bookseller having to check that they're not the banned
list—oh yes, there are still books animals aren't supposed to be
allowed to read," he snorted, seeing the look on Noxy's face. "They
might give us *ideas*."

He picked at a piece of lint on his jacket. "And most of all," he
said, not looking up, "We want our families to be safe, even if
they're not gifted." He glanced up at her. "Does that sound like so
much to ask?"

Noxy didn't know how to answer, so instead she asked, "But what has
all of this got to do with the bear? And the princess?"

Mope shrugged. "I've heard Rust speak at meetings sometimes, the kind
of meetings that humans aren't invited to. She thinks that the only
way to fix the world is to shake it up a bit, and hope that when the
pieces fall into place, they'll fit a bit better than they do right
now. As long as the king is the only one who can change the law, the
only way to change the law is to get the king's attention."

Noxy's eyes had gone wide. "You have to tell Thokmay," she
gasped. "Mope, why haven't you told Thokmay? You're talking about his
*sister*!"

"I'm also talking about the life of every gifted animal in Loghan!"
he snapped back. "Do you have any idea what will happen to us if
people think that a bear has kidnapped a member of the royal family?
Do you? We'll all be turned into rugs, or roasted for some fat
farmer's dinner."

"Oh, don't be ridiculous," Noxy said. "Just because one bear was—"

"One?" Mope snapped again. "You think it only happened once? My father
worked in a circus. He and my mother did tricks together in towns like
this. When I was born gifted, the circus trainer tried to cut my vocal
cords, so that no-one would know I was gifted. My father stopped
him. He threw himself at that, that piece of trash, and he stopped
him, but he was beaten so badly that he died. The trainer was never
punished, of course. It was just my mother's word against his, and he
was *human*."

When he looked up at Noxy, she backed away involuntarily from the old
hurt and anger in his eyes. "That's why I taught myself everything
there is to know about the law," Mope finished quietly. Dolly had put
her arm around her son, and for once he didn't push it away. "That's
why I'm trying to teach the prince. Even if he'll never be king, he'll
be important. They'll have to listen to him."

Noxy looked away to give Mope a moment to control the tears that were
trying to escape him. A few motes of dust sparkled in the sunlight
that streamed in through Dolly's bedroom window. A small drawing of
the royal family, the kind of thing that street artists turned out by
the dozens on festival days, was in a small frame on the dresser,
beside a cracked old leather cap and a wide-toothed wooden comb with
mother-of-pearl inlay in the handle. She could hear morning birds
whistling at each other outside, and she wished more than anything
that she was back in Stale.

Finally Dolly said wearily, "Mope, we *have* to tell Sergeant Inambu
about Rust. There's no-one else left."

"If she believes us, and I said 'if', she'll have every animal in
Apple Bridge down in the dungeon by nightfall," Mope replied, just as
wearily. "And you mark my words, half of them will never come out
again."

"Dear, Apple Bridge doesn't have a dungeon," his mother said gently.

"Well then she'll put us on rafts in the middle of the river! Or the
stables! That would probably appeal to her." Mope flapped his hands.
"Whatever she does, it will be very, very bad."

"What if we could prove that it wasn't Rust?" Noxy asked suddenly.

"What do you mean?" Dolly asked.

"Well, if everyone thinks the bear took the princess, but she didn't,
then they'll all be looking in the wrong place. If we can *prove* she
didn't take Princess Ogmin, then we'd still be helping to find the
princess."

"Hmm," Mope mused, pursing his lips. "We would at that, wouldn't we?"
He looked at Noxy shrewdly. "Of course, we'd be doing exactly the same
things we would do if we were trying to prove that Rust *did* kidnap
Her Highness."

"Mm hm," Noxy conceded, "But if it *is* Rust, and if we can find the
princess before anyone else does, then if we get her back, it'll all
come out even—an animal took her, but an animal brought her back."

"In my experience, people rarely do their moral bookkeeping that
carefully," Mope said sourly, but then he nodded his head. "All right.
We'll try to find out if Rust *didn't* take Princess Ogmin." He
glanced at his mother. "That is, if it's all right with you."

"Of course," Dolly said. "I just want to find her. She must be
terrified."

</section>
<section markdown="1">

## Chapter 11: Attacked

The tornado roared into the sky, doubling in size and then doubling
and doubling again as it poured out of Mukh's bag. "At them!"
Sergeant Gyalpa shouted to the soldiers. "Get in close, or it'll swat
you like ladybugs!"

The soldiers charged, shouting "Loghan! Loghan and the dawn!" The
smugglers shouted curses back. The ones on foot braced the ends of
their spears against the ground, so that the soldiers' horses couldn't
get close, while the ones who were riding horses of their own drew
their swords and dug their spurs into their mounts.

"Stay close, Your Highness!" Sergeant Gyalpa ordered the prince. He
paused, watching where men were going, watching where they weren't,
then shouted, "Haw!" and spurred his horse forward. The prince dug his
heels into his own mount and followed him.

The next few seconds were mad confusion. The soldiers had to ride
around the front rank of smugglers to avoid their spears. As they did
so, Mukh held up the copper hoop he'd been holding in his lap and
shouted commands at the tornado. It twisted and danced across the
ground, then lashed out like a man kicking a ball.

Instead of a ball, though, it connected with a soldier on
horseback. The man's horse screamed as it was lifted into the sky. The
soldier himself dropped out of the saddle onto the ground. His left
leg buckled underneath him as he hit the ground. Before his comrades
could reach him, a smuggler on horseback lunged forward, leaned over
in his saddle, and swung his sword.

An instant later Prince Thokmay saw Manpa and another soldier cut left,
then right, then left again to get in close to the knot of
smugglers. Mukh didn't hesitate. The tornado snatched up the two
soldiers and a smuggler as well and tossed them through the air. They
tumbled like dice.

Sergeant Gyalpa stood up in his stirrups and waved his sword over his
head. "Fall back!" he shouted. "Fall back! We can't get past that
thing!" He watched the melee for a moment in despair, then snarled,
"They can't hear me! Your Highness, we have to get you out of here!"

"No!" the prince protested. "I won't run away!"

"And I won't have a dead prince on my scroll!" the sergeant bellowed
back. "Now don't make me carry you on my shoulders!"

"I will *not* run!" the prince shouted. "Haw!" He dug his spurs deep
into his horse's flanks. The frightened animal bounded forward. Behind
him, Sergeant Gyalpa cursed, then kick his own horse into a gallop as
well.

Prince Thokmay crouched low over his horse's neck and charged straight
at the smugglers. The wind-blown grit stung his eyes. He felt his
horse's hooves pounding on the ground beneath him. The smugglers were
small, small, small, and then suddenly larger and larger as he dodged
behind a startled spearman and swung. His blade bounced off armor. A
spear thrust up past his ear. He ducked and screamed in fear and anger
and swung his sword again—

And suddenly the earth beneath him was churning like the ocean in a
storm. His horse screamed with fear as she lost her footing and
stumbled, neighing with panic as she found her footing again and
leaped toward solid ground. The prince twisted around in his saddle,
just in time to see the spearman he'd just passed sink to his knees in
the turbulent earth.

Somehow Sergeant Gyalpa was beside him. "It's that thing!" he shouted.
"The land—his magic is waking it up! We have to get out of here,
*now*!"

"But what about the troops?" the prince shouted back. He suddenly
realized he was crying.

"They're already falling back, Your Highness. Look!" Sure enough,
everyone was fleeing, smugglers and soldiers alike, as the land roiled
and heaved like a living thing.

"Guard my back!" the sergeant ordered the prince. He spun his horse
around and charged at the smugglers. Most of the spearmen were
struggling to get to their feet. As the horsemen around Mukh tried
to get their panicky mounts under control, Sergeant Gyalpa charged
through them and swung his sword.

The prince saw the sergeant's blade connect with the copper hoop that
Mukh was still struggling to hold high. There was a flash like
lightning. Mukh and the sergeant both cried out. The hoop flew
through the air. When it hit the ground, the earth splashed like
water. The copper hoop sunk out of sight like a stone thrown into a
murky pond.

The tornado roared in triumph as it felt Mukh's hold over it
break. It pounced on the smugglers like a cat pouncing on a crippled
bird, throwing them this way and that. Prince Thokmay saw Mukh leap
from his horse an instant before the tornado snatched it up. The
smuggler scrambled over to the old tree stump and pulled a man-tall
mirror off the wagon that was still somehow parked there. He propped
the thing against the stump and dove through it an instant before the
tornado snatched it up.

The prince shouted, "Look out!" but it was too late. The mirror
slammed into Sergeant Gyalpa like a stone from a catapult, knocking
him from his horse.

"No!" the prince screamed. He dug in his heels. "No!" His horse
charged forward.

Sergeant Gyalpa tried to stand, but fell again as his knee gave way.
"Go back!" he shouted to the prince. "Go back!"

"Hang on!" the prince shouted back. He pulled his horse up short
beside the sergeant and half-climbed, half-fell out of the saddle.

"No, Your Highness, you have to save yourself!" the sergeant shouted,
pushing the prince's hands away.

The prince grabbed the sergeant's sleeve and pulled him up onto his
good leg. "I've already lost one sergeant," the prince grunted. "I
will *not* lose another! Now climb up on that horse!"

The prince pushed the sergeant up by the rump while the sergeant
pulled himself up into the saddle. A heartbeat later the prince swung
himself up behind him. "*Now* we can run," he said. He smacked the
horse on the rump. The animal didn't need any encouragement. It
galloped heavily away.

Behind them, the tornado picked up Mukh's magic mirror and smashed
it to the ground once again, then whirled off toward Apple Bridge.

</section>
<section markdown="1">

## Chapter 12: Comes Big Song

Mope and Noxy walked down the main street to the Dog Market, asking at
every shop they passed about the bear Rust. Even when Mope asked the
questions, many of the shopkeepers gave their answers to Noxy. After
that had happened a few times, Mope started letting Noxy do all the
talking. He just stood behind her quietly, then followed her back out
again.

The baker who had sold them beaver tails the day before scowled when
they asked. "A bear? Mm, I remember one down in the market, selling
knick knacks and all. Haven't seen it today, though." He raised his
voice. "Oy, Jokhang! You seen that bear around today? That big old
scruffy one from down the market, with the wagon."

"Can't say I have," Jokhang puffed. He had tied two dozens bricks
together with twine to make a block, and then put two wide cloth
straps around it so that he could carry it like a backpack. He set the
whole thing down with a groan, and wiped his brow. "Why, is that who
took the princess?"

"We just think she might have seen something on the road," Noxy said
quickly. "Since she left last night, I mean."

"Mm, well, I wish I could help," the brickmason said regretfully. "She
was a real smile, she was." Noxy couldn't help but notice how he said
'was' instead of 'is'.

They split up when they reached the market itself. Noxy spoke with the
stern-faced leek woman, who was in her usual place by the
stairs. "Nope, but good riddance," was all she said when Noxy asked
her if she knew where Rust might have gone.

Piqaluujaq clucked his tongue when she asked him. "She is not go here
this day," the Anuat trader said. "The sun, today, and she is gone."

"You mean she left last night?" Noxy asked. Piqaluujaq shrugged. He
glanced around to see if anyone was looking, then reached into the
middle of one of his piles of seal skins and pulled out a small wooden
hoop, crisscrossed with thin leather cords. Bits of red thread were
tied around the cords wherever they crossed. A dark red feather, and
an old piece of bone, dangled on loops of cord from the hoop's bottom.

"My grandmother between days sings with Edward," he confided. "Old,
old song, from sun magic days."

Noxy shook her head in confusion. "I don't understand. Is your
grandmother here? Did she see Edward's ghost?"

The Anuat clucked his tongue again and held out the wooden hoop. "My
grandmother," he explained, pointing at the piece of bone dangling
from it.

Noxy's eyes went wide. "That's…those are from you grandmother?"

"Between days," Piqaluujaq confirmed, nodding. "She sings with Edward.
Between the sun, someone else sings, from where goes away dogs. From
all bent, the land."

Noxy still didn't understand, but then suddenly she did, and her
stomach went cold. "From the Blight?" Noxy gasped. "Someone was using
Blight magic last night? Mope! Mope!"

"Coming!" the troll called from two lanes away. Noxy heard a
chicken squawk as the troll trod on it. "What have you found?"

She grabbed his arm excitedly. "He says there was Blighted magic here
last night," she hissed, nodding her head at Piqaluujaq. The Anuat
trader had tucked his hoop back out of sight, but he grimaced at
Noxy's words. "His grandmother told him."

Mope looked around. "Is she still here?" he asked. "If someone has
brought something here out of the Blight we should report it, even if
it has nothing to do with Princess Ogmin's disappearance."

"Um, no, I think she's gone now," Noxy said hastily. "But—"

Suddenly Piqaluujaq grunted and winced.

"What's wrong?" Noxy asked. "Are you all right?"

Piqaluujaq looked up at the sky. "Comes big song," he gasped. "Big
angry song. Comes *now!*"

Just as he said it, Noxy heard something crash in the distance. People
looked up, startled or annoyed or afraid, as the town bell started to
ring, *dong, dong, dong, dong*.

"What's happening? What can you see?" Mope demanded, hopping up and
down.

"Nothing," Noxy said, standing on tip-toes. "I can't see anything at
all." All around them traders were hastily packing away their more
precious goods, or throwing cloths or nets over their stalls and tying
them down.

"Well, something must be wrong," Mope fretted. "They wouldn't ring the
bell otherwise. We should go back to the garrison house."

They pushed their way through the crowd. The normal buzz and stir of
the market had been replaced by shouts and frantic haste. Someone
stepped on Noxy's foot. Someone else pushed her hard from behind, and
then a two-wheeled cart strung with ropes of sausages was in her
way. She ducked under its handles, ignoring the curses of the
heavy-set man who was pushing it. Mope scrambled through after her.

"I spoke with some raccoons who do repairs for the rafters' guild,"
Mope puffed as they dodged around braying donkeys and worried
traders. "They didn't want to talk at first, but the younger one
finally admitted that Rust bought a raft from them a couple of days
ago, before you arrived in town. She had them leave it tied up by the
old fishing weir, about an hour's walk downstream." He grabbed Noxy's
arm and tugged. "Come on over this way, it'll be quicker. Anyway,
guess what else they sold her?"

"What?" Noxy asked. Someone shoved someone in front of them. A moment
later a neat pyramid of jars of apple preserve turned into a
sharp-toothed porridge of broken glass and apple sauce on the
cobblestones. Noxy skipped over it, then paused a heartbeat for Mope
to catch up.

"Blankets," Mope puffed. "And biscuits, and apple sauce."

"I don't understand," Noxy said. They had slowed to a walk so that
Mope could catch his breath. The troll stopped completely,
wheezing.

"What, would, a, bear, do, with, blankets?" he gasped. "And how, would
she, open, jars?"

Whatever Noxy might have said next was cut off by a long, mournful
howl. It seemed to come from everywhere at once, echoing around them
like a mountain gale. Noxy clapped her hands over her ears and looked
up. There, standing on top of his own statue, was the ghost of Edward
the Dog. It was so solid that the building behind it was only visible
as a dark shadow across its chest.

"ARRRROOOOOOOOOOOO!!!" it howled again, and then someone cried out,
"Up there! Look! It's the tornado! It's coming straight for town!"

"Big angry song," Noxy whispered to herself. She grabbed Mope by the
arm. "Come on! We have to get to the garrison house before it hits!"

They didn't make it. Freed of Mukh's magical control, free at last
from any kind of control at all, the tornado swept down on Apple
Bridge like an angry bull. Noxy heard a crash that went on and on as
the tornado tore shingles off of the roofs of houses and threw them
into the air like pieces of straw. As it whirled up the main road,
Jokhang's new window shattered, the shards of glass transformed into
thousands of flying knives.

"Down here!" Mope shouted. He pulled Noxy into a side alley, then
under a set of stairs. "Hold on!"

Noxy had heard bull clouds thunder at each other, and whole fields of
snow fall in avalanches down the sides of mountains, but nothing as
loud or as furious as the tornado. It lifted the logs from the main
street and used them to batter down the walls of the nearby shops. It
pulled at the statue of Edward the Dog, but when it found that the
statue couldn't be lifted from its column, it battered it with a
wheelbarrow full of bricks until statue and column alike were rubble.

It took the tornado only a heartbeat to reduce the stalls and wagons
in the dog market to kindling. It smashed pots and scattered
carefully-stacked boxes of herbs. It hopped over the wall and danced
on the river, flipping over rafts one by one. The muck and water it
flung into the air fell back on Apple Bridge as muddy rain.

"Where are you going?" Mope cried as Noxy wriggled out from under the
stairs.

"I have to get to Cloak!" Noxy shouted. She could barely make herself
heard over the tornado's horrific roaring. "She'll be terrified!"

"But you can't go out in this!" Mope grabbed her ankle and tried to
pull her back under the stairs.

"Let go!" Noxy shouted, kicking at his hand. "I have to get to Cloak!"
She twisted around, then slipped her foot out of her boot and
scrambled away before Mope could grab her again.

She was nearly knocked off her feet by the wind despite the shelter of
the narrow alley. She grabbed a nearby wall to steady herself, then
half-stumbled, half-flew down the alley away from the main street.
Behind her she heard Mope shouting, "Noxy, come back! Come back!" but
she bowed her head and pressed on.

She had almost made it to the alley's other end when the tornado grew
tired of playing in the river and swept back across town toward the
garrison house. She suddenly felt as if she was caught in the current
of a fierce mountain stream. It pulled her forward, faster and faster.

Noxy screamed as she felt herself being lifted into the air. She
stumbled forward a few more steps, then threw her arms around the
railing of the last set of stairs in the alley. The wooden posts shook
in her hands. She could see the railing start to pull free, pulled
sideways further and further by her weight and the fierce wind. She
fell on her knees and tried to hug it, but the wind pulled her feet
out from under her. Something long and heavy, a door or a table,
tumbled past her end over end, like an axe thrown by a giant.

She just had time to think that she would finally find out what it was
like to fly when a big, hairy hand fastened onto her collar. "Don't
let go!" Mope shouted in her ear. The troll grabbed the stairs
with his other hand and both his feet. "Whatever you do, *don't let
go!*"

Something fluttered over them like a bird, then crashed to the ground
in the middle of the parade courtyard. "There goes someone's laundry!"
Mope shouted. "And look—there's Sergeant Inambu!"

Noxy turned her head, scraping her cheek against the railing post. Up
above the exit from the alley, she could see that Sergeant Inambu had
somehow climbed onto the roof of the middle wing of the garrison
house. As Noxy watched, the sergeant stood up and raised her arms.

"Come on, come on," Mope pleaded in Noxy's ear. "Give it all you've
got!"

The sergeant brought her hands together as if she were clapping. A
sharp *crack!* cut through the sound of the tornado's winds. Noxy saw
the tornado jerk as if it had been bitten. It leaped over a house and
swept its tail at Sergeant Inambu.

The sergeant reached up and grabbed the air in front of her, as if she
was wrestling with an invisible opponent. Something pushed her back a
step, and another. Noxy could see the tornado straining to reach her,
held back as if by the invisible hands of a giant. Then Sergeant Inambu
twisted and spun around, whirling her arms in a wrestling throw.

The tornado howled as it flew threw the air, tumbling end over end.
Sergeant Inambu straightened up, raised her arms, and clapped again.
*Crack!* The tornado doubled over.

Sergeant Inambu raised her clasped hands over her head, bracing her
legs like a sailor in a rough sea. She spread her arms wide once more,
then brought her hands together for the third time.

*CRACK! BOOM!* Lightning flashed, and Noxy screamed. The dazzle
blinded her, and the air suddenly tasted like metal.

It took her a moment to realize that the wind was gone, even though
the sound of it still roared in her ears. Mope had to say her name
three times before she heard it.

"Yes, I'm all right," she told him. She suddenly realized that her
arms and back were aching from holding onto the stair railing. As the
troll let go of her she scrambled to her feet.

Splintered boards and branches, broken glass and gobs of mud… The
garrison house's parade courtyard was covered with the remains of the
tornado's makeshift toys. Noxy stared at the destruction for a moment,
then tried to shake free of Mope's grasp. "Let me go!" she
protested. "I have to find Cloak!"

"Never mind your cloud," the troll said. "Where's Sergeant Inambu?"
The magician could no longer be seen on the roof of the old house.

Noxy and Mope limped across the parade courtyard. They were almost at
the door when it flew open and Dolly came running out. She threw her
arms around her son, weeping.

"I'm all right, mother, I'm all right," he said gently. He patted her
back awkwardly for a moment, then reached up and disentangled her
arms. "Are you?"

"I'm—I'm fine," his mother said. "I just—I thought—"

"I'm fine," Mope repeated. "So is Noxy. But we have to find out what
happened to the sergeant."

"And I have to find out what's happened to Cloak!" Noxy said. She
limped as fast as she could toward the door. She was still a few yards
away when a soldier she half-recognized stepped through and blinked in
the afternoon light.

"Are you all right?" he asked. He took Noxy by the shoulders as she
tried to step past him. "Here, let me look at you."

"I'm fine," Noxy said, pushing his hands away. "I have to talk to my
cloud!"

"Do you know what happened to Sergeant Inambu?" Mope asked from behind
her.

The soldier looked grim. "She's collapsed," he told them. "That spell,
whatever it was she did…she just fell down. A couple of the men
carried her to her room. The doctor's with her there now."

Mope hesitated for a moment. "Go see to your cloud," he told Noxy.
"Mother and I will see if there's anything we can do for the
sergeant."

Noxy limped through the house and out into the rear courtyard.
"Cloak!" she cried, aloud and with her mind at the same time.

Cloak was huddled in a corner. Noxy didn't have to mind-listen to know
how terrified the young cloud was. She stumbled over the rubble that
had fallen into the courtyard and wrapped her arms around a tuft of
the cloud.

"I'm sorry," she whispered, tears stinging her eyes as she stroked the
quivering cloud's flank. "I'm sorry, I should have been here. Are you
all right? Hm? Are you all right?"

"Bad cruel tearing roaring," the cloud whimpered in her head. She
nodded.

"I know," she said. "I'm sorry. I'm sorry. It's gone now."

The last of the sunlight had faded by the time she went back in the
house. She found Mope in the kitchen, sweeping up broken glass with
the cook and two of her assistants.

"How is Sergeant Inambu?" Noxy asked.

Mope didn't look up. "Well enough to not want my company, or my
mother's," he said shortly. He looked up at Noxy with hurt in his
eyes. "But she'll be all right."

"Sergeant! Sergeant!" A soldier came running in from the back alley.
"You two, where's the sergeant?"

"She's upstairs—no, wait, don't go up," Mope said. "She's still
exhausted. What's wrong? What's happened?"

"The old barrel house," the soldier panted. "Down by the dock. The
wall's caved in. There's people inside, we can hear them!"

Mope turned to Noxy. "You go upstairs and tell Sergeant Inambu what we
discovered," he ordered crisply. "And you, take me to the warehouse!"

</section>
<section markdown="1">

## Chapter 13: Snow

Prince Thokmay and Sergeant Gyalpa stayed on horseback until they were
over the crest of the hill, where the sergeant reined in Bucket so
that the prince could slide off her back. "She'll never be able to
carry both of us, will you, girl?" the prince said, speaking to
Sergeant Gyalpa as much as to the horse. "Eh? Will you, girl?" he
soothed, stroking the horse's neck. The weary animal just snorted.

The prince patted her one more time, then looked up at his companion.
The sergeant's jaw was clenched, and his frown showed pain as much as
anger. "How is your leg?" Prince Thokmay asked.

The sergeant straightened up a bit in the saddle. "Still a mess," he
said. "I don't think it's broken, but the knee is in bad shape. Put me
up against that tree over there, and go and get help. I'll be all
right."

"I think I'd rather have some company," the prince replied lightly.
"Here, drink some of this." He passed his half-empty canteen up to the
old soldier.

As the sergeant drank, Prince Thokmay looked around. The sky above them
was almost dark, but the land was still lit by a soft glow that came
from nowhere and everywhere at once. On one side, the rocky slope led
down to the churning field they had fled, beyond which was Carmick
Hill and the road home. The other side led down to a narrow valley. A
few trees grew near the small stream that ran along the its bottom.

"D'you hear that?" the sergeant suddenly said. "The wind's dying
down." He passed the canteen back to the prince, who tucked it into a
saddle bag.

"Do you think Mukh put the tornado back in its bag?" the prince
asked.

Sergeant Gyalpa snorted. "Not without that thing he was waving around,
I'll wager," he said, satisfaction getting the better of pain in his
voice for a moment. "I just hope the others are all right."

"Me too," the prince said. He patted the horse once more, then put his
helmet back on. "Come on. I think I see a path down there by that
stream."

They picked their way down the rocky hillside. It was bigger than it
had seemed—it seemed that the further down they went, the further
they had to go. Prince Thokmay walked in front, while Sergeant Gyalpa
rode behind him with the reins in one hand and his sword laid across
his lap.

Neither of them spoke until they reached the floor of the small
valley. The path turned out to be a narrow dirt road, and the stream
to be so wide that some might have called it a river.

"It's further than I thought," the prince said, looking back the way
they had come.

"It's all like that around here," Sergeant Gyalpa told him. He
gestured with his sword toward a small clump of trees. "Twisted, like
them. Something that looks like it's a hundred yards off can take you
all day to get to. Or you can barely see it, but you ride for five
minutes, and there you are. Sergeant Inambu said it's something to do
with the way magic bends the light, and all." He shook his head. "I
don't pretend to understand it."

"Nor I." The prince pulled the canteen from the saddle bag and gulped
the last of the warm water. "I thought about becoming a magician once,
you know," he suddenly confessed. "After my visit to Stale. I
thought that since I'd already had a taste of it, I might as well make
it my life."

"Why'd you decide against it?" the sergeant asked.

The prince shrugged. "When Barramarrabee—His Majesty's chief
magician—found out, he asked me if I really wanted to spend my life
giving up things I cared about." The prince paused for a moment,
looking along the length of the stream. "When he put it that way, I
had to wonder. I asked him why anyone would ever become a magician."

"And what did he say?"

The prince shook his head. "All he said was that some people don't get
to make as many choices as a prince." He shook out the canteen as he
spoke, and bent over the stream.

"Wait! What are you doing?" Sergeant Gyalpa asked sharply.

The prince glanced up. "Filling the canteen," he said. "We're out of
water."

"Hold it by the strap," the sergeant ordered. "Don't put your hand in
the stream. Just dip the canteen. Yes, like that."

The prince lowered the canteen into the stream. Fat bubbles escaped
from the mouth for a moment, and then the prince said, "What…?" The
bubbles were trapped under the surface of the stream, as though there
was a thin layer of ice on top of the water.

He tried to lift the canteen from the water. It wouldn't budge. He
lowered it slightly—it went deeper without any resistance. When he
tried to raise it again, it simply wouldn't come up.

"What's going on?" he asked, suddenly more afraid than he had been
during the battle.

The sergeant scowled. "We're in the Blight, that's what," he said.
"Sometimes a stream is just a stream, and sometimes it's a live thing
that'll pounce on you like that tiger your brother has, and
sometimes…" He pointed at the canteen. "Sometimes it's greedy."

"I could have put my hand in there," the prince whispered.

"You could have," the sergeant agreed. "But you wouldn't ever have
taken it out again. You'll probably want to stay out from under those
as well," he added, pointing at the trees up ahead. "They might not be
as smart as the ones around Lake Ormadine, but they can be meaner than
wolverines."

He winced suddenly as Bucket shifted her weight. "Is there anything we
can do for your leg?" the prince asked, not caring that his voice
broke. "Manpa showed me how to make a splint."

The sergeant nodded, swallowing another pained grunt. "We'll cut your
tent poles in thirds," he said. "And then we'll follow this stream. I
think that way is starboard—the Trout's off there somewhere. If we can
make it that far, we can get a raft to take us back up to Apple
Bridge."

The prince noticed that the sergeant said 'if', not 'when', but didn't
comment. Instead, he wrestled his pack off Bucket's back, then took a
hatchet from one of the saddle bags. The tent poles did double duty as
braces for the pack. It took him a moment to untie the straps that
held them in place, and then a few moments longer to cut them to
length.

That done, he helped Sergeant Gyalpa get down onto the ground. The
sergeant had to lie down on top of Bucket, then swing his good leg
over her back and slid down into Prince Thokmay's arms, trying as he
did so to keep his good leg underneath him. Bucket whinnied, but did
not step away, as the sergeant first sat, and then lay down, on the
ground beside her. "Just—just straighten it at the knee," the
sergeant gasped. "Yes, like that. Good jo-aagh. No, no, it's all
right. It's all right. Try again. Use your weight. Urgh. Harder. No,
go on, it's going to hurt either way, you might as well—urrrggh."
Sergeant Gyalpa clenched his fists so tightly that the prince heard
one of the joints crack.

"All right, all right," the sergeant gasped a moment later. "That's
straight enough. Put the poles down beside it. You're going to have to
lift m' leg to get the rope under it. Yes, like that. Now, easy, both
hands, just lift—no, no, both hands on my leg, just drop the rope
underneath. Yes. And again. One more. Uuhhh… All right, now tie it
all up. No, tighter than that. Don't worry about cutting off the
blood. No, not like that. Where'd you learn to tie knots? Just cross
it over and—here, let me."

Sergeant Gyalpa had to prop himself up on one elbow in order to sit
up. Prince Thokmay sat back and watched while the sergeant untied and
then re-tied the last knots in the rope that held the splint
together. His hands shook, but his grip was strong.

When it was finally done, he looked up at the prince. "Thanks," he
said. "You did well."

The prince swallowed. He wanted to lie down in his bed back in Apple
Bridge and sleep for a week, but instead he got to his feet. "Let's
get you back up on Bucket," he said, putting the sergeant's arm around
his neck as the older man struggled up onto his good leg. The sergeant
pulled himself up onto Bucket's back until he was lying on his stomach
in the middle of the saddle. Prince Thokmay helped him swing his good
leg over to the other side of the horse, and then edge forward into
the saddle. When it was done, the sergeant was back where he had been
ten minutes before, but with six roughly-cut lengths of wood tied
around his injured leg to hold it straight.

They set off along the narrow road, the prince walking, the sergeant
riding. Their conversation was sparse: "Watch out, that mud will be
slippery," or "Put those branches on behind me, we can use them for a
fire tonight."

The prince guessed that they had covered four or five miles in about
two hours when Sergeant Gyalpa finally said, "All right, we'll camp
here for the night." The little valley had widened and flattened, so
that there was twenty yards or so of level ground on either side of
the road. There was grass, too, and a few blackberry bushes, and even
a patch of reeds in the stream.

"Is it safe to let Bucket graze?" the prince asked once the sergeant
was down out of the saddle.

Sergeant Gyalpa shook his head. "Not here," he replied. "You ought to
have some oats and all in your—yes, good, give her that. Anything
she eats from around here will probably poison her, or turn her into a
frog." He tried to smile. "Can you see me riding on frogback?"

"I can see us both riding on one of Noxy's clouds," the prince said,
trying to match the sergeant's light tone. "It'd be softer than that
saddle, and we'd be so high up that all of this would look like
nothing more than a badly-drawn picture."

The sergeant snorted. "Thanks all the same, but I'll take my chances
down here," he said. "I know how to fall off a horse, but falling off
one of those things…" He shook his head.

The prince helped the sergeant onto the ground, then pointed at a
clump of blackberry bushes a few yards from the road. "There are some
branches over there. If you can stack the ones we have, I'll get some
more. That ought to get us through the night."

"Yes, Your Highness," the sergeant said.

The prince stopped in his tracks, then turned slowly. The sergeant was
looking at him expressionlessly. "That's the first time you've called
me that since the tornado," the prince said slowly.

"Is it, Your Highness? I'm sorry." The sergeant braced a branch
against the stony ground and leaned on it until it snapped, then set
the two pieces on top of two other, smaller pieces that he had already
laid out. The result looked like a giant's wooden tic-tac-toe board.

The prince took a deep breath. "I wouldn't mind if you didn't bother
highnessing me, you know."

The sergeant shook his head and broke another branch. "I'm sorry, Your
Highness, but it might be a hard habit to break afterward, and that
wouldn't be a good for the troops."

The prince blinked. "So what's changed from three hours ago?"

The sergeant looked up at him, still without any expression on his
face. "Three hours ago, I didn't think I'd ever see any of the other
troops again to set a bad example." He broke another branch in
two. "Best get that firewood, Your Highness. I don't think it's going
to get dark, but I can feel the cold coming on."

Prince Thokmay nodded. He had felt the air growing cold as well. He
took the hatchet from Bucket's saddle bag again and walked over to the
blackberry bushes. They rustled slightly as he approached, even though
there was no wind.

"Easy, easy," he said softly. Somehow it didn't seem strange in this
place to be talking to a plant. "I'm not here for you. I just want
those old scraps of wood." He gave the bushes a wide berth, and
started stacking the dried-up old sticks in his arms.

He didn't notice the first flake of snow, or the second. It wasn't
until one landed on his cheek that he looked up and realized that the
air was full of tiny dancing white bits of fluff. "But it's the middle
of summer," he muttered, exasperated. "Even here!" He picked up a few
more pieces of wood and turned around.

The snow was falling faster now, so thickly that he could barely make
out the road. The flakes melted as soon as they touched the ground,
but the air was getting colder by the second. "Sergeant!" the prince
shouted. "Sergeant, can you hear me?"

"Yes, Your Highness," the sergeant called. He sounded puzzled. "What's
the problem?"

"I can barely see you," the prince said, his voice breaking. In fact,
he couldn't see the road at all.

"What's wrong, Your Highness? Are you all right?" Prince Thokmay heard
the sergeant grunt as he tried to get up.

"No, wait, stay where you are!" the prince called. He brushed a
handful of snow from his hair. "I just can't see through all this
snow."

It wasn't until the sergeant shouted, "What snow, Your Highness?" that
Prince Thokmay felt afraid. He stumbled in the direction that he
thought the sergeant's voice had come from. The snow wasn't melting on
the ground any longer.

"Sergeant!" he shouted. "Sergeant, have you got the fire going?"

"Yes, Your Highness! Can you see it?"

"No! Keep talking, I'll try to get to you!"

"But Your Highness, I can see you!" Prince Thokmay had to strain to
hear the sergeant's voice. The falling snow was muffling
everything. With a shock, the prince realized that the hatchet had
fallen out of his fingers. They had already become numb from the cold.

"Tell me which way to walk!" the prince shouted back desperately.
"Hurry!"

"Straight ahead, Your Highness! No, no, left! Left! That's
right. That's right, straight ahead! No, you're turning again!"

"I am not!" the prince shouted back in frustration. "I'm walking in a
straight line!"

"Stay where you are!" the sergeant shouted. "I'll come and get you!"

"No!" The prince paused for a moment. His teeth were chattering.
Suddenly he had an idea. "Sergeant! Sergeant, can you hear me?"

"Yes, Your Highness!"

"Sergeant, I want you to put out the fire! Right now!" The prince
dropped the armload of wood he was somehow still carrying and took
another few steps through the knee-high snow. He couldn't feel his
feet.

"But Your Highness—"

"Right now!" The prince almost screamed.

There was no sound for a moment, then the sergeant shouted, "It's out,
Your Highness. What now?"

"Just keep talking!" the prince shouted, hoping he had guessed right.
"Just… k-k-keep… t-t-t-talking!"

The prince slogged forward another step, and another. Was the snow
falling a little less heavily? He tried not to think about it. He
remembered his uncle's stories about retreating through a blizzard
from Ax Medicine during the Anuat rebellion thirty years before, then
tried to push them out of his mind as well. Most of the other soldiers
in his uncle's regiment had never seen Garheim-in-Garheim again.

But a few heartbeats later there was no doubt: the snow was easing
off, and the air was warming up. Prince Thokmay shouted, "Sergeant? Am
I headed the right way?"

"Yes, Your Highness. No, wait, turn right. Now go ahead. No, turn
right again, and—hold on, Your Highness, stay right where you are."
Something thumped to the ground a few feet away from the prince a
moment later.

"Can you see that?" the sergeant called. It was a saddle bag, with one
of the tent's stay ropes tied to it. The prince stumbled forward and
grabbed the rope. Its other end was knotted to another stay rope that
led off through the snow.

"I've got it!" the prince shouted. He trudged through the snow,
holding onto the rope like a sailor holding a guide rope in a heavy
storm.

One moment Prince Thokmay was calf-deep in snow. The next, he was
standing on the road with the rope in his hands. He blinked, then
whirled around. The tied-together ropes stretched no more than ten
yards to the saddle bag, which sat dumbly on the dry, stony
ground. The wood the prince had collected was tumbled together a few
yards from the bag.

"But I—but it was snowing!" the prince mumbled.

"I know," the sergeant said. "You're covered in it. And your hands!
Your Highness, you're freezing! I'll get the fire—"

"N-N-No!" the prince chattered. "Th-that's what st-st-started it, I
think. The l-l-land was ang-ang-angry about th-the f-fire."

"Well, it didn't react here, Your Highness," the sergeant said firmly.
"And we have to get you warmed up. Sit down here."

It only took Sergeant Gyalpa a few heartbeats to coax a small spark to
life in a pile of tinder, and another few moments to get it to catch
on a small branch. The prince watched miserably as the fire slowly
spread through wood, which was still smoldering from the fire the
sergeant had doused. Feeling slowly returned to his fingers and toes,
and what they mostly felt was painful.

He sniffled and wiped his nose. "I couldn't see anything," he said. "I
mean, out there."

"I couldn't either, Your Highness" the sergeant said. "You were just
stumbling around, it looked like." He frowned. "I wonder… Sergeant

Inambu said once that there were safe roads in the Blight. The Pilots
built them so that they could cart stuff in to Fast Lake to dump
it. Maybe this is what's left of one of those."

"S-so are we headed in toward the lake, or out?" the prince asked. His
voice cracked again.

The sergeant shook his head. "I don't know, Your Highness. Direction
doesn't mean a lot in here." He looked up at the starless sky. "I just
wonder what's going to be waiting for us when we get out. Mukh must
know he can't hold Apple Bridge for long, not even with a dozen
tornadoes. He must be planning something, but what?"

</section>
<section markdown="1">

## Chapter 14: The Other Side of the Mirror

Noxy took the stairs two at a time, but slowed to a walk as she got
closer to Sergeant Inambu's door. She knocked hesitantly, then pushed
the door open.

The room she stepped into was as large as her own, but seemed smaller.
Half a dozen old pieces of furniture had been pushed against one wall
and covered with sheets. A narrow cot lay under the window, next to a
plain wooden desk and stool. The only decorations were a framed sketch
of a run-down old farmhouse, and an oval mirror taller than Noxy
hanging on the wall opposite the bed. A gentle breeze blew in past the
open shutters on the room's single large window.

"Sergeant Inambu?" Noxy asked the empty air, even though she could see
no-one was present.

"Noxy?" The cloudherd jumped and whirled around at the sound of a
voice behind her.

"Oh, I'm sorry, dear," Dolly said, patting her arm distractedly. "I
didn't mean to startle you." The old troll looked around the room
curiously, just as Noxy had done a few moments before.

"It's all right," Noxy replied a bit shakily. "Have you seen Sergeant
Inambu?"

"No, I haven't. The soldiers downstairs said you'd come up to look for
her."

"I wonder where she's gone?" Noxy asked, puzzled. "She must have been
completely exhausted by that spell she cast. But guess what Mope and I
found out?" she added excitedly, suddenly remembering why she had come
upstairs. "That bear, Rust—she bought blankets and biscuits and
other stuff in the market a couple of days ago, and got a raft from
some raccoons. Mope thinks it must have been to take Princess Ogmin
down the river!"

"Downriver?" Dolly gasped. "But—but then she could be anywhere by
now!"

Noxy felt awful as she saw tears well up in Dolly's eyes. She closed
her eyes and mind-listened for a moment, then grabbed Dolly's
shoulders in her hands. "Listen," she said urgently. "We can take
Cloak. She's still not well, but if the tornado really is gone, and if
we go slowly, it ought to be all right. Clouds heal pretty quickly,
you know, especially young ones. Even if Rust has the fastest raft on
the river, we ought to be able to catch up in an hour or two."

Dolly stood absolutely still for a moment. When she spoke, the tone of
her voice reminded Noxy of Sergeant Gyalpa. "All right," she said.
"I'll get some clothes for her, and some proper food."

"I'll wait here and tell Sergeant Inambu," Noxy nodded. The troll
hurried away.

Noxy took a deep breath. Cloak was feeling stronger—Noxy hadn't lied
about that—and she really was a quick healer, but the injured cloud
wouldn't be back to her full strength for at least another day. She
could imagine what Grappa Diego or Aft would say if they ever found
out…

She was still worrying about it when the oval mirror next to Sergeant
Inambu's cot went *bloop* and began to ripple, like a pond that someone
had just thrown a pebble into. For one wild second Noxy was sure that
she was dreaming, that the whole day must have been just a dream.
Without thinking she took a step forward. "Ouch!" she whimpered as she
banged her shin against one of the old dressers standing next to the
wall. She lost her balance stumbled down onto one knee.

Just as she did so, the mirror went *bloop* again. Mukh toppled out
into the room and collapsed in a heap on the floor, a small leather
backpack clutched in one hand.

Noxy's body reacted before her mind had a chance to get in the way.
She ducked under the sheet that was draped over the dresser she had
just banged her shin against and flattened herself on the dusty wooden
floor.

She lay there, afraid to move, afraid even to breathe, until she heard
the skinny smuggler groan and get to his feet. "Inambu?" he whispered
loudly. "Inambu, girl, where are you? Eh?"

Noxy saw the smuggler's feet under the edge of the sheet as he tiptoed
past the her to the door. The door's hinges creaked slightly as he
pulled it closed. As he walked back toward the mirror, Noxy noticed
that his boots didn't match. One was dirty brown, and worn down at the
heel, while the other had a delicate pattern of copper buttons
stitched around the sole, and looked like it had just been
polished. *I can guess where you came from,* she thought.

Sergeant Inambu's cot creaked as the smuggler sat down on it. Noxy's
mind raced. Dolly would be back any moment. If she found Mukh, the
smuggler would have to—

The door creaked open. "Ah, finally!" Mukh said. Noxy heard him get
to his feet. "I was just wondering if I should go down to the kitchen
and see about some dinner."

"They'd feed you your own ears if you did," Sergeant Inambu said. Noxy
could hear the weariness in her voice. "Do you have any idea what that
monster of yours has done to this town?"

"Oh, they needed an excuse for a good clean-up anyway, didn't they?"
Noxy saw Mukh's mismatched boots again. He stopped a few feet in
front of Sergeant Inambu. "I'm more worried about what it did to
*you*," he said, doing his best to sound concerned.

"Nothing good," the sergeant replied shortly. She made to step past
the smuggler, but he stepped into her way. Their boots were almost
toe-to-toe.

"Let me look at you…" he said softly. There was a pause, and then

Noxy heard him say, "Oh, Inambu. Inambu, girl—you shouldn't have done
this. Not this. Not for them."

"You didn't leave me much choice," the sergeant replied. "There would
have been nothing left of this town but mud by the time it was done."

"But girl, there's not even going to be mud left by the time we're
done. You know that!" Mukh sounded amused.

Sergeant Inambu was silent. "And I'm afraid that's the bad news I'm
here to give you," the smuggler continued. "I'm not going to be able
to finish this on my own. I'm going to need your help."

Sergeant Inambu snorted. "Mine? Look at me, Mukh—look at me. Here,
would you like one as a souvenir?"

"Shh, shh," Mukh said soothingly, even as he stepped back. "Don't do
that. Don't pull at them. Just leave them alone. We'll be done soon,
done for good, and then you can just magic yourself up a whole new set
of teeth." He stepped forward again. Noxy heard a rustling sound as he
hugged the sergeant.

*If the door wasn't closed, I could get past them now,* Noxy thought.
*Oh, Dolly, be careful…*

"What happened, anyway?" Sergeant Inambu asked.

"Turns out the Blight didn't like us much," Mukh replied. "And after
all we're going to do for it—shows you what kind of gratitude you
can expect from dirt and rocks, eh?" He sighed. "The bad news is that
Old Musclebrain managed to knock the spirit trap out of my hands. I'm
sorry, girl, but it's gone—the land swallowed it up." He made a
gulping noise to illustrate. "We're going to have to do this the hard
way."

There was a moment of silence. "What do you mean?" Sergeant Inambu
asked hollowly, as if she already knew the answer, but still had some
hope that she was wrong.

"I mean you're going to have to break the spells on the dam yourself,"
Mukh said. "No, listen, listen to me," he added urgently, answering
some look that Noxy couldn't see. "Just listen. You can do it, I know
you can. It doesn't matter how much it takes out of you, not this
time. Once we can get to the lake and back out again without turning
into dust, you'll have all the magic you've ever wanted, all the magic
you've ever dreamed of. It'll be just those stories Dad used to
tell. You'll have the power of the stars, the wind, the, the, I don't
know, the whole *ocean*! But you have to break that dam. Inambu, you
have to. We're so close."

"I can't," the magician told him faintly. "Not now. There are five
different spells that have to be cast. The guards would stop me before
I was halfway through the first one."

"Well, if that braying little donkey of a prince had taken the whole
troop with him, that wouldn't be a problem," Mukh snarled. "Can you
order them away? Can you, I don't know, can you send them to look for
what's-her-name, the girl?"

"I could…" Sergeant Inambu said slowly. "Or I could have them help
clear up the mess your tornado made. If I gave them their orders in
ones and twos, they wouldn't realize the dam's been left unguarded."
Noxy saw the sergeant's feet walk over to the cot, and heard it creak
as she sat down. "I'm just so tired…"

Noxy held her breath, then sloowwwwly slid forward so that she could
peek under the sheet and see what was happening in the room. Mukh
was fishing around in his pack. Sergeant Inambu was looking at her
reflection in the mirror he had come through. Finally Mukh said,
"Aha!" He pulled a small black cloth bag out of his pack, loosened
the drawstring, and pulled out a clear glass marble.

He frowned at it. "Almost empty, almost," he muttered. He sniffed at
it, then held it out to Sergeant Inambu. "Do you think there's enough
left for another trip?" he asked.

"I don't know," the sergeant said dully.

"Hmph." Mukh up-ended the bag and shook it out onto the desk. He
picked up one of the pebbles that rattled onto the desk, sniffed at
it, then licked it as if it were a piece of candy. "Nope," he said. He
picked up another. "Definitely not. Ah, here we are." He showed
Sergeant Inambu the pebble he had selected. "The back wall of the old
farmhouse. Remember how we used to hide there when it was time to do
chores?"

"Did we?" Sergeant Inambu said, sounding for a moment like the little
girl she had once been, back before the Blight took her home away from
her. "I wish—I wish I could remember."

"I'll do the remembering for both of us," Mukh promised. "For as
long as I have to. But that won't be much longer, will it?"

Sergeant Inambu blinked and heaved a deep sigh. "What are you doing?"
she asked, as if waking from a deep sleep.

"We can't take any chances, not now," the skinny smuggler said. He
showed her the marble and the pebble he had selected. "I told them
all, if we got separated, they should make for the farmhouse. The
land's pretty quiet around there, and slower than most of the Blight."
He snorted a laugh. "Dad did that much right at least."

He closed his hand into a fist. "Tell your troops you've found out by
magic that we're riding on Apple Bridge. Tell them, I don't know, tell
them you had a vision when you were fighting the tornado, but you only
just remembered it. Whatever you say, make sure you send them along
the south road. The *south* road, all right? We'll wait for them where
the road comes around what used to be Aunt Angela's place."

Sergeant Inambu sighed again. "Do we have to?" she asked.

"No," the smuggler said uncaringly, "But it's the safest card to
play." He leaned over and kissed her cheek. "I'll see you when it's
over," he said. "And I promise, it'll be over soon."

He straightened up, shouldered his pack, and tossed the marble and
pebble underhanded into the mirror. Instead of bouncing off, they made
a slight *gloop*. Once again ripples spread across the mirror. Mukh
stepped into them and disappeared.

Sergeant Inambu waited a few seconds, then stood up, crossed over to
the desk, picked up her sword, and drew it. "You can come out now,
Noxy," she said quietly.

Noxy held her breath, but didn't move. Sergeant Inambu waited a second,
then flipped the sheet up with her sword. "I saw you in the mirror,"
she said tiredly. "Now come out. And please, don't try to yell." The
sergeant hefted the sword. "It's been a while since I had to use one
of these, but you know what they say—once you learn, you never
forget."

Noxy edged out from underneath the dresser. As she did so, Sergeant
Inambu stepped sideways to stay between Noxy and the door.

They studied each other for a few heartbeats while Noxy dusted herself
off. Sergeant Inambu spoke first. "Aren't you going to ask me why?"

"I really don't care," Noxy said bitterly. "All I care about is that
you're going to hurt a lot of people. A *lot* of people. And my cloud,
too."

Sergeant Inambu smiled faintly. "And all I care about is what's under
Fast Lake. Mukh's shown me things, things I never knew were
possible. He found a spirit trap, just a hoop of copper with some
wires on it. Do you know what it did? It let the person a spell was
*for* pay for it, instead of the person casting it. Just think what
that would mean! Just think what it would be like to be able to do
magic without—without—" She put her hand to her mouth and
tugged. "Without this!"

Noxy looked away from the tooth that Sergeant Inambu was holding out.
"And that's worth killing everyone in Apple Bridge?" she asked.

"That's worth anything," Sergeant Inambu said, without hesitation,
without a trace of doubt in her voice. "Justice is worth whatever it
costs."

"Justice?" Noxy gasped in outrage. "Where's the justice in killing
innocent people!?"

"Where's the justice in magicians having to scrape themselves down to
the bone, year after year, for other people's sake?" Sergeant Inambu
snapped back. "And where's the justice in spending your whole life
just trying to keep a lid on some garbage that some magician who was
dead two hundred years before I was born couldn't be bothered to clean
up for himself?" She gestured with the sword at the cot. "Now *sit
down!* I have work to do, and I can't have you running around getting
in the way."

Noxy crossed her arms. "What are you going to do? Put me to sleep for
a hundred years?"

"No," Sergeant Inambu said, tired again. "I'm going to tie you up. I
can't afford to waste any magic putting a spell on you right now."

Noxy edged over to the cot and sat down. Without looking away from
her, the sergeant reached down to open her kit bag, then pulled out a
coil of heavy twine. "Put out your hands," she ordered Noxy. "On
second thought, stand up, so that I can—"

The door burst open with a bang. Sergeant Inambu whirled around,
raising her sword, but Dolly ducked under it. Before Noxy could fill
her lungs to scream, Dolly grabbed her by the waist, slung her over a
shoulder, and leaped through the open window.

"Hang on!" Dolly yelled. Noxy caught just a glimpse of the ground
beneath her, far beneath her, then went *oomph!* as Dolly caught a
branch of one of the apple trees that grew next to the garrison house
and swung them around. Something sizzled behind them as Dolly grabbed
another branch, then half-slithered, half-slid down the tree onto a
shingled roof.

"Stop! Stop!" Noxy shouted. "We're—ooph!—we're far enough away!"

Dolly slowed, then put Noxy down and collapsed in a heap. "I'm too old
to be doing things like that," she wheezed. "As a matter of fact, now
that I think about it, I don't think I was ever young enough."

"Did you hear them? Did you?" Noxy demanded.

Dolly nodded. Noxy could hear the old troll's breath rasping in
and out. "Just…just the last bit. About…about sending the soldiers
away."

"We have to stop them!" Noxy said. "They'll—"

"How?" Dolly gasped.

Noxy opened her mouth to say, "We'll tell the soldiers," then closed
it again. Dolly was right. It would be their word against Sergeant
Inambu's.

"What—spell—" Dolly tried to say.

"It's all right, don't talk," Noxy said to her, suddenly concerned.
The old troll's eyes were wide, and Noxy could see her chest
heaving. She reached out impulsively and put her arms around her
rescuer. "Thank you," she said softly, hugging Dolly.

Dolly just nodded. Gradually her heartbeat began to slow down. "What
if she casts a spell on us?" she finally managed to say. "With a
hairbrush, or—"

"She doesn't have the strength," Noxy said, trying to sound more
certain than she felt. "She needs it all for the dam. But we have to
do something to stop her. We have to save the town!"

Prince Thokmay and Sergeant Gyalpa took turns sleeping through what
passed for night in the Blight. They didn't re-light the fire. It was
so cold by the time morning came that the prince shivered through the
whole of his last watch.

"It's cold, isn't it, Your Highness?" Sergeant Gyalpa finally said
without opening his eyes.

"I've been colder," the prince chattered, "Up in the mountains. But
not by much."

This time Sergeant Gyalpa did open his eyes, and sit up. He rubbed his
knee for a moment, then settled back on his elbows. "What was it like,
Your Highness?" he asked. "If you don't mind my asking."

"I didn't feel any different afterward, if that's what you mean,"
Prince Thokmay said. "It's probably easiest to show you." People had
asked him that question a hundred different ways in the four years
since his return from Stale. His answers had always seemed
inadequate. The magician Barramarrabee had finally taken pity on him,
and given him something to help explain.

He fished around in his pocket for a moment and pulled out a loop of
string. "I think this is the right one," he said, handing it to the
sergeant.

Sergeant Gyalpa looked at suspiciously. "What is it?"

"It's a knot that can't be untied," the prince told him. "The wizard
Shuqang made it, a long time ago. One of the magicians at court gave
it to me."

The sergeant examined the knot. "Doesn't look hard," he hedged. "Just
a half-snake under."

"Go ahead, try it," the prince urged.

Sergeant Gyalpa raised his eyebrows, then took off his gloves and
started to untie the knot. At least, that's what he set out to do.
Somehow, though, he dropped the string as he was taking off his left
glove. He had to hunt around a second to find it. When he picked it
up, it caught on a button on one of the side pockets of his
trousers. When he tried to tug it free, it slipped through his
fingers. He cursed under his breath and picked it up again more
carefully.

A couple of minutes later, he had finally managed to get a firm grip
on the string using both hands, only to find that he didn't have any
fingers left to untie it. "It really doesn't like me, does it?" he
said in exasperation, and then added, "Your Highness."

"No, it doesn't," the prince agreed. "And if you hung it from a nail,
and tried to work on it that way, you'd stumble and bang your head.
That's how I got this." He pointed at a small scar on his forehead.
"It's not that the knot is difficult, it just…can't be untied." He
looked straight at the sergeant, holding the man's eyes for a moment
as Mope had taught him. "That's what it was like. Nothing changed,
except that I could never be king."

Neither spoke for a few moments. The emptiness of the twisted land
around them seemed to fill every space, every silence. "What was it
like for you?" the prince finally asked. "I mean, growing old so
quickly."

The sergeant cleared his throat. "Doesn't feel special," he said after
a moment's reflection. "I guess anyone who's a soldier gets old too
fast, whether they're in the Blight or not."

They traveled as before. Sergeant Gyalpa rode on Bucket, while Prince
Thokmay walked along beside them. They saw mud and rocks, bushes and
trees, but nothing that moved except an occasional bird, far in the
distance. Prince Thokmay tried to count his footsteps to keep track of
how far they had come, but kept forgetting whether he was in the three
hundreds or five hundreds. He supposed it didn't really matter in the
Blight anyway.

He was startled out of his bleak daydream by Sergeant Gyalpa's voice.
"Look, Your Highness," the sergeant said, pointing. It took Prince
Thokmay a moment to realize that all the sergeant was pointing at was a
few brown blades of grass, and a lone dandelion.

"Is it dangerous?" the prince asked.

Sergeant Gyalpa laughed. "No, Your Highness. It's just a plain old
dandelion. They don't grow in the deep Blight. They don't like the
magic." The sergeant scanned the hills around them. "We must be coming
out of it, but I don't recognize where we are."

They saw the next dandelion ninety-two paces later. There was another
thirty-six paces after that, and another after that. Slowly,
grudgingly, the rocky brown earth let normal life take hold. The
prince couldn't help but grin the first time he saw a startled rabbit
streak away from them.

The sergeant noticed his grin. "It's always good coming out of there,
Your Highness." He tipped his head back slightly and sniffed. "And is
that water I smell?"

Bucket sped up as they crested a small rise. The road ran down on the
other side to the roofless ruins of a one-room mill on the banks of
the slow-moving Trout. A stand of apple trees had gone wild near what
was left of the mill's walls. A few brown logs poking up out of the
river like rotten teeth showed where the mill's loading dock had been.

Sergeant Gyalpa let Bucket follow her head down the hill and into the
trees. As she bit an apple off a low-hanging branch, he clambered out
of the saddle and put his arm around Prince Thokmay's shoulder. "It'll
be safe to light a fire here, Your Highness," he said, wincing as they
shuffled over to what was left of the mill building. "Then we can
figure out how we're going to get back to town."

They were just a few feet away from the building when Prince Thokmay
heard Bucket snort, then neigh loudly. "Back me!" Sergeant Gyalpa said
loudly, taking his arm from the prince's shoulders, drawing his sword,
and turning to his right, all at the same time.

Prince Thokmay drew his own sword and turned to his left, so that he
and the sergeant were facing in opposite directions. "What's
happening?" he whispered loudly.

"Something's up there," the sergeant said shortly. He stood
motionless, searching the mill, the river bank, and the knee-high
summer grass with his eyes. "Can you see anything in the trees?"

The prince swallowed. "No," he said, trying to match the sergeant's
calm tone. "Nothing except Bucket."

"Stay with me," the sergeant ordered the prince. He half-hopped,
half-limped forward. Prince Thokmay stepped backward to stay with him,
keeping his sword in front of him and holding his left arm straight
out from his side for balance.

"RRAAAAWWWWRRR!!" Rust charged at them from around the corner of the
old mill. The prince whirled around as Sergeant Gyalpa cursed, hopping
to keep his balance. She batted Sergeant Gyalpa's sword out of his
hand, then reared up on her hind legs as the sergeant toppled
backward, cursing.

"Throw it on the ground!" she snarled to the prince. "Now!"

"Keep back!" he shouted at her. He lunged at her belly. Too late, he
realized that she had tricked him. She stepped nimbly aside and batted
his head with her paw. The blow knocked him flat.

He lay there for a moment in a daze with the world swimming around
him. It steadied and came back into focus. His head started to pound
at the same moment.

"Your Highness, are you all right?" The sergeant rolled over and
dragged himself over to Prince Thokmay.

"He's all right," the bear rumbled. She had dropped back onto all
fours. She sniffed at them, then lumbered over to the prince's sword
and carefully picked it up in her jaws. She set it down against a
stone and stepped on it. The sword bent slightly, then snapped with a
sharp *crack!* A moment later, the sergeant's sword made the same
sound.

Sergeant Gyalpa helped the prince sit up. "What are you doing here?"
he mumbled.

"I was about to ask you the same question," the bear said. She glanced
over at the stand of apple trees, from which Bucket was nervously
watching them. Rust bunched her shoulders and charged at the horse
with another huge roar. The horse turned and galloped away.

"Stupid animals," Rust muttered under her breath, watching the horse
disappear over the top of the hill. "None of 'em have ever been
gifted, did you know that?"

Prince Thokmay stood up as she approached. "Where's my sister?" he
demanded. "What have you done with her?"

"She's down by the river," Rust said, then snarled, "No!" as the
prince made to dodge around her. She nodded her head ponderously at
the sergeant. "Help him up. We all go together. And we all go
*slowly*, you hear? Slowly."

Even if the bear hadn't been two watchful steps behind him, Prince
Thokmay couldn't have gone quickly with Sergeant Gyalpa's arm around
his shoulder. The sergeant seemed much less steady than he had been
before the bear had ambushed them. Prince Thokmay hoped he was
exaggerating his lameness.

They came around the corner. A sturdy-looking river raft was
half-hidden in the brambles that had grown up against the side of the
mill, where the door to the loading dock had once been. And on the
raft—

"Ogmin!" Prince Thokmay cried. His sister was sitting in the middle of
the raft next to a crude lean-to. She had drawn up her knees and
buried her face in them. She still had her nightdress on, and a
too-large coat and a ragged pair of boots that looked like some poor
beggar's cast-offs. Nothing was left of her long, beautiful hair
except stubble.

At the sound of her brother's voice her head shot up. "Thokmay!" she
cried. "Oh, Thokmay!"

Without thinking Prince Thokmay shook off Sergeant Gyalpa's arm and
started to run. He only got a few paces before Rust butted him in the
back with her head and sent him sprawling.

He heard Ogmin scream as he rolled onto his back and looked straight
into Rust's angry eyes. She stood over him with one paw on either side
of his head. Her breath was hot and wet and foul on his face. "I said
*slowly*," she said menacingly. "I won't say it again."

Prince Thokmay gulped. The bear's jagged teeth were yellowish near
their roots, but gleaming white at the points. "I'm sorry," he said
weakly.

"Rrrmmm," the bear rumbled. She shuffled sideways so that he could get
up. "Now get up. It's time for dinner."

Somehow Prince Thokmay helped Sergeant Gyalpa slosh through the
knee-deep water to the raft. The prince scrambled up onto the raft and
embraced his sister. "Oh, Ogmin," he said, hugging her fiercely. "Are
you all right?"

"I'm sc-scared," his sister said, tears running down her cheeks as she
held him tight. "I tried not to be, but I couldn't help it."

"Sh, sh, sh," he whispered in her ear. "It's all right. It's all
right. I'm not going to let anything happen to you." He took a
half-step back to look at her.

Ogmin dropped her eyes. "They—they cut off all my hair," she
whispered desolately. "I told them Dolly would be mad, but they did it
anyway."

The prince felt tears welling up in his own eyes, but blinked them
away. "It's all right," he said fiercely. "You just watch—the day
after we get back to Apple Bridge, everyone will have cut their hair
just as short as yours."

"But I don't want to go back there," Princess Ogmin said. "I hate it
there. I want to go *home!*"

"So do I," Prince Thokmay whispered. He gave her another hug. "So do
I. But we can't, not just yet."

Sergeant Gyalpa cleared his throat. "Your Highness…?"

"Yes?" Prince Thokmay said, without letting go of his sister or turning
around.

The raft suddenly dipped to one side as Rust scrambled up onto it.
Princess Ogmin shrieked. Prince Thokmay stumbled, then straightened up.

"You," Rust said to Sergeant Gyalpa. "Get off."

"No," the sergeant replied flatly. "I'm staying with Their Highnesses."

The bear snorted. "You can get off and wait for your horse to come
back, or I can knock you off. It comes to the same thing either way."

Sergeant Gyalpa's face reddened. "I will *not* leave!" he shouted.

"Do as she says, Sergeant," Prince Thokmay ordered tiredly as the bear
growled deep in her throat. "She's right—if she doesn't want you on
board, one way or another you're going to get off. That's an order,"
he added, as the sergeant took an angry breath. "When Bucket comes
back, I want you to ride for Apple Bridge and get help."

"Yes, Your Highness," the sergeant said stiffly. He hesitated, then
saluted. "It's been a pleasure to serve you, sir." For a moment he
looked as though he wanted to say something else as well, but the
moment passed. He slid awkwardly off the raft into the river.

"Sergeant!" the bear called. Sergeant Gyalpa turned around.

"Push us back out into the current before you go," the bear ordered.

For a moment Prince Thokmay thought the sergeant was going to climb
back up on the raft and try to strangle Rust with his bare
hands. Instead, he looked up at the prince. "Your Highness?" he asked.

"Do it," Prince Thokmay told him. "And good luck getting home."

"Thank you, Your Highness." The sergeant braced his shoulder against
the raft and pushed with his good leg. The raft barely moved. Sergeant
Gyalpa took a deep breath and grunted as he shoved again. This time
the raft shifted slightly. A third push got it clear of the
brambles. It slowly gained speed as the river current began to pull it
along. Sergeant Gyalpa stood there with the river lapping at his
thighs until the main current of the Trout caught the raft and took it
away. Then he struggled back to the bank and started calling for
Bucket.

Prince Thokmay resisted the urge to wave as the sergeant dwindled into
the distance behind them. Instead, he put his arm around his sister.
Princess Ogmin sniffled again and laid her head on her brother's
shoulder.

"Don't worry," Prince Thokmay whispered in her ear. "Sergeant Gyalpa
will get help. We'll be all right."

The raft swayed again as Rust sat down on her haunches next to the
lean-to in the middle. "There's food in there," she said, waving a paw
at the shaky-looking structure. "And blankets, if you're cold."

"Thank you, that's very kind," the prince said icily. "I suppose it
would be too much to ask for a change of clothes and a hot bath as
well?"

The bear's nose twitched. "I only planned on having the princess along
on this trip," she warned the prince. "If you don't mind your manners,
I might decide that was still the best idea."

The prince bit off an angry response. "Why don't we sit up at the
front?" he said to Princess Ogmin. "We can play 'I Spy' if you want."

"I don't want to play," she whined, but followed her brother up to the
front of the raft.

"How about I go first?" the prince said lightly. "I spy, with my
little eye, something that is—"

"Bears can swim, you know," Rust interrupted from behind them. "We can
swim pretty well. Even if you could make it to the shore ahead of me,
your sister probably couldn't."

The prince sat silently for a moment, then put his arm around his
sister again. "All right," he said. "If you don't want to play, we
don't have to."

"I'm hungry," Princess Ogmin said after a few minutes.

Prince Thokmay twisted around. "Can I get her some food?" he asked
Rust.

The bear shrugged. "Why not?" She wrinkled her nose again. "The
biscuits are in the brown bag, and the apple sauce—"

"—is in the jars," the prince finished for her. He knelt down in
front of the lean-to and pulled out the biscuit bag and two jars of
apple sauce. A pair of heavy blankets were crumpled together to make a
Ogmin-sized nest under the lean-to. A small straw doll lay beside
them.

Prince Thokmay picked up the doll. "What's this?" he asked.

The bear shifted uncomfortably. "I thought it would keep her quiet,"
she said.

"Hm." Someone had pulled a few strands of straw part-way out of the
head to give the doll some spiky hair. Prince Thokmay felt tears sting
his eyes again. He gently laid the doll back by the blankets.

He sat down cross-legged and laid some biscuits out on his
leg. "You're acting more like a nurse than a kidnapper," he observed
as he spooned some apple sauce onto the biscuits. "From what we saw of
your friend Mukh, I would have expected you to be…rougher."

A rumble came from deep in the bear's throat. For a moment Prince
Thokmay was reminded of the sound that Kulbinder made when he smelled
something that he didn't like. "He's not my friend," Rust said. "We
were just business partners, that's all."

"Business partners," the prince echoed neutrally, careful not to look
up. Mope had taught him this, as well—how to leave silences for
other people to fill.

The bear rumbled again. "He needed eyes and ears in Apple Bridge, and
someone to buy supplies for him with the money he got for the things
he brought out of the Blight. I needed the princess. It seemed like a
good exchange."

"You needed the princess," the prince repeated. "Why didn't you need
me?"

The bear snorted. "How would I have gotten you?" she asked. "Mukh's
magic was good enough to get the princess out in the middle of the
night, but it wouldn't have worked on an adult."

"She's an adult," the prince said angrily, then cut himself off.

He thought furiously as he spooned some more apple sauce. "Why did you
leave Sergeant Gyalpa behind?" he asked, handing Princess Ogmin a
biscuit. The princess made a face at it, but took it and bit into it
anyway. Prince Thokmay supposed that she had been eating a lot of
biscuits and apple sauce recently.

"Why would I bring him?" the bear replied. "Nobody cares enough about
him for him to be a good hostage."

"Bringing him along wasn't the only other option," the prince said,
swallowing a mouthful of biscuit himself. He looked over at the bear.

She studied her paws for a heartbeat. "No sense killing unless you
have to," she said. She raised her head to meet the prince's
eyes. "It's something humans would do well to learn," she added
bitterly.

The prince looked away first. "Probably," he said. "But I don't see
how kidnapping us is going to teach them." He handed his sister
another biscuit. She sat on the edge of the raft and scraped the apple
sauce off it with her finger, then licked the sticky goop off her
finger as the river bank went by.

"I don't expect it to," the bear said. "But it will teach animals that
they can fight back if they really want to. It will show them that
they don't have to live by laws that humans have made, or stay in the
cages that humans have put them in."

"I don't remember ever seeing a gifted animal in a cage," the prince
said. "Not in Loghan, anyway."

"Some cages aren't easy to see," the bear told him, settling back on
her haunches. "I've been trading in Apple Bridge for almost twenty
years, but I still have to ask for permission to set up my stall each
time I come to town. Human traders are allowed to come and go as they
please. Every noble household in the Marches hires gifted animals,
but how many of those animals ever become nobles themselves?"

"How many of them would want to?" Prince Thokmay asked, frightened
slightly by the anger in the bear's voice. "It's not as much fun as
most people think."

"Rrrr…" Princess Ogmin jumped at the bear's angry growl and looked
at her brother fearfully. He patted her shoulder with his hand, but
didn't take his eyes away from the bear. "That's what your kind always
say," Rust sneered. "Oh, poor us, what we do is so hard, it takes so
much out of us. The world is better off just letting us run
things. Well, do you know what's hard, Your Highness?" The bear almost
spat the last two words. "What's really hard is watching your son run
through with a spear for sport, and knowing that the *humans* who did
it went off and bragged to their friends that night at dinner about
what a good day's hunting they'd had."

"If someone murdered your son, why didn't you find a judge and have
them brought to trial?" the prince asked. "Even in Garheim, they
would—"

"Because killing ungifted animals isn't murder!" the bear
snarled. "Not according to human law. It doesn't matter if their
parents are, or if their parents love them. If an animal can't speak,
it's fair game for any featherless chicken with time on his hands and
a taste for blood."

She pointed at Princess Ogmin, who had covered her ears with her
hands. "But it would be murder if I did to her what your kind did to
my son, wouldn't it? Why is killing an ungifted animal not a crime,
but killing an ungifted human is?"

The prince gaped at her, his mind whirling. "But you can't—she's not
ungifted!" he exclaimed. "It's not the same thing!"

"Oh no?" the bear asked grimly, settling back on her haunches. "Then
why does she have a nursemaid, instead of a tutor like you do?"

"You're mad," the prince said flatly.

The bear snorted. "I live in a mad world. But I think a lot of other
animals will start to see it a little more clearly once I show them
how to look at it."

The prince's mouth had gone dry. "I don't believe you," he said
steadily. "If you were really going to murder my sister, you would
have done it by now."

"Rrrr…" Rust scratched her neck. "Shut up and eat your apple
sauce. I'm tired of talking to humans."

The prince studied her face carefully. "That's what you meant to do,
isn't it?" he said slowly. "But you couldn't. You couldn't give her a
doll to sleep with, then… then…"

"I said shut up!" the bear growled. The prince shook his head, then
turned around and put his arm back around his sister.

</section>
<section markdown="1">

## Chapter 15: A Trap Is Sprung

Noxy's feet dangled in the air. "Is it all right, dear?" Dolly asked.

"Yes," Noxy said breathlessly. "You can let go."

The troll released her arm. She dropped into the alley with an
*oomph!* Dolly landed down beside her a moment later.

"Are you hurt?" she asked in a concerned voice.

"Just… winded…" Noxy gasped. She gave herself another moment, then
stood up and brushed the dirt from her knees. "Come on."

They crept as quietly as they could through the narrow alley toward
the rear courtyard. Shouts came, and they froze, but it was just a
couple of soldiers who needed help moving an uprooted tree.

Noxy almost jumped out of her skin at the sound of three sharp whistle
blasts. The sound was so loud that she and Dolly both clapped their
hands over their ears. Noxy looked around wildly, sure that the
whistle blower had to have been right behind them, but no-one was
there.

"What was that?" Dolly asked fearfully.

"I don't know," Noxy said. "But we're almost there." She closed her
eyes and mind-spoke to Cloak, calming the nervous cloud.

They had only gone another few steps when they heard shouts and
commotion behind them. Noxy hesitated, then put her finger to her lips
to signal 'quiet' and crept back the way they had come. By the time
she reached the other end of the alley, two squads of soldiers were
already lined up in the main courtyard. More came running into their
places as she watched.

Sergeant Inambu stood in front of them with her head and shoulders
bowed. She was leaning on a walking stick, and seemed oblivious to
the noise around her. *She must have used magic to make her whistle
louder,* Noxy thought.

"Oh no!" Dolly whispered, peeking around Noxy's waist. "She's going to
send them out to be ambushed, like she said!"

"We have to stop her!" Noxy said.

"Wait, no!" Dolly hissed, grabbing Noxy just as the cloudherd started
to step out of the alley. She pulled Noxy back a few paces and spun
her around. "Who do you think they'll believe, us or her?"

"But we have to try!" Noxy pleaded. "The smugglers will kill them!"

"They'll believe their sergeant before they'll believe an troll
and a foreign girl," Dolly said resignedly.

When Sergeant Inambu spoke, her voice was too weak to carry to the
alley. All Noxy and Dolly heard were a few disjointed words:
"…hill… call… help… wounded… quickly…" Then the soldiers
saluted and ran for the stables, leaving the sergeant standing alone
in the middle of the courtyard.

"Come on!" Noxy hissed. Once again Dolly had to grab her and hold her
back.

"What do you think you're doing?" the troll asked. "She's still
strong enough to make the whistle that we heard. Do you think she
won't have enough strength to put you to sleep, or make you mute?"

"But we have to do something!" Noxy protested. Out on the square,
Sergeant Inambu looked up tiredly. Dolly and Noxy froze as the magician
glanced around, then shook her head and started walking toward the
gateway.

"Mope will know what to do," Noxy said suddenly. "He went down to the
warehouses to help rescue someone."

They waited until Sergeant Inambu had left the courtyard, then waited a
few heartbeats longer. "Ready?" Noxy whispered. Dolly nodded. "All
right, let's go." They ran across the courtyard to the archway and out
into the street.

It only took them a couple of minutes to get down to the chaos by the
docks. One old warehouse had collapsed completely, while the top part
of the wall of another had fallen in one piece into the street. It lay
there like a jigsaw puzzle that someone had been too bored to finish
assembling. The townspeople were working like busy ants to clear away
the rubble and find anyone who might be trapped underneath.

"Mope! Mope!" Noxy yelled, trying to make herself heard above the
noise and confusion.

"The ape's inside!" a familiar voice shouted back at her. The baker
was standing there with an armload of rubble in his arms, and so much
dust and mud on his face that Noxy wouldn't have recognized him if it
weren't for his deep voice.

"Are you all right?" she asked.

"I'm fine," he said, "But Jokhang—that thing swatted him like a
fly."

Noxy opened her mouth, but all she could think of saying was, "I'm
sorry." She turned and climbed up the ruins of the collapsed wall
behind Dolly.

Dolly helped to pull her up to what was left of the warehouse's upper
floor. "Mope?" they shouted. "Mope, where are you?"

"Mother?" a muffled voice shouted back. "Noxy? Is that you?" They
stepped forward cautiously. The middle of the floor had fallen in
completely when the roof had collapsed onto it. Down in the pit below
they saw Mope and two humans looking up at them anxiously. One of the
humans was the leek seller who had refused to serve Dolly. Noxy gasped
as she suddenly realized that the bundle of rags the trio was gathered
around was a man, whose leg was trapped underneath a fallen roof
timber.

"Mother, we need help down here!" Mope said urgently. "We can't lift
this on our own!"

Dolly didn't hesitate. In one fluid motion she crouched down, grabbed
a protruding floor beam, swung down beneath it, and dropped down to
the floor below. "Where do you want me?" she asked her son, brushing
her hands against her jacket.

Mope pointed at the other side of the fallen roof timber. "Over
there," he ordered. "And you two, grab the end and try to lift it from
there. Ready? One… two… three!"

The man whose leg was caught screamed as the roof timber
shifted. "Back up!" Mope grunted at him. The man dragged himself
backward a pace. His four rescuers let the roof timber crash to the
ground and rushed to him.

"Lift his leg," Mope ordered the leek seller, pulling off his
shirt. The man screamed again. Mope twisted his shirt to make a short,
thick rope, then tied it around the man's leg. He picked up a short
runner of wood that had probably been meant for training vines and
stuck it through the makeshift tourniquet. With a grunt, he twisted it
around twice.

"That ought to stop the bleeding," he said. "But we have to get him to
a doctor."

"Mope—we need to talk to you," his mother said urgently. "It's about
the sergeant. She—" Dolly cut herself off as the leek seller and the
other man lifted the wounded man to carry him out.

The younger troll sat back on his haunches. "What has she done
now?" he asked wearily. "Are we all under curfew?"

"No, worse." His mother dropped her voice. "Noxy and I heard her
talking to that trader, the one who took Princess Ogmin. They're
working together! Mope, they want to destroy the dam! She's sent all
of the soldiers out of town to be ambushed, and she's going to break
the spells on the dam!"

Mope stared at his mother. "I can't believe it," he finally said. "As
much as I dislike her, I can't believe that she'd—"

"Believe it," Noxy said. She had followed Dolly's route to the floor,
but less gracefully, and was now limping slightly. "He came through
the mirror. I think he's her brother."

"Her brother? But he's old enough to be—oh." Mope fell silent for a
moment as he worked it out. "Why would they want to destroy the dam?"

"I think they want to drain some of the magic out of Fast Lake so that
Mukh can get to it," Noxy explained. "There's magic there that works
in reverse, kind of. It takes strength from the people it works on,
instead of from the magician casting the spell."

Noxy wouldn't have thought that an troll's face could go pale the
way that Mope's did. "So it *does* exist…" he whispered. "There are
stories—old stories, nightmares. That's what finally brought the sky
down on the Pilots. Someone invented a kind of magic that took from
the people it worked on, whether they wanted it or not. But it always
took more than the magic was worth. They used it on themselves until
they'd used each other up."

"Well, Mukh has one, whatever it is," Noxy said. "And now Sergeant
Inambu's sent the soldiers out of town. Mope, she's could be at the dam
right now! She might already have started!"

"I wondered what that whistle was about," Mope muttered. He looked up
at Noxy. "Is your cloud strong enough to fly yet?" he asked.

Noxy nodded. Mope stood up with a grunt. "Good. You go and warn the
soldiers. Mother and I will figure out some way to stop Sergeant
Inambu."

Dolly stretched up onto her tiptoes to kiss the cloudherd on the
cheek. "Be careful, dear."

Noxy ran as fast as she could back to the garrison house, no longer
caring if she was seen. Cloak hovered restlessly a few feet off the
ground. Noxy jumped up and grabbed the side of the cloud with both
hands.

"Up!" she mind-spoke as she pulled herself up. "Up, up, up!"

Cloak rose into the air, slowly at first and then faster. In a few
heartbeats Noxy was up above the rooftops. She glanced at the dam, but
couldn't see Sergeant Inambu. "Fast!" she mind-spoke at Cloak. They
turned south and started flying above the road that led to the Blight.

Noxy crept forward until she was right at the cloud's edge. The
countryside below her was green and peaceful in the summer sun. She
saw some farmers leading horse-drawn carts toward Apple Bridge, but
was too high up to call to them.

"Higher!" she mind-ordered the cloud. Cloak struggled to
obey. "Higher! Slow!" The cloud slowed to a gentle float, and rose
higher.

Noxy scanned the landscape. The road made a long, gentle loop around a
hill up ahead. If she went around the hill the other way, over the
forest, she could save a few minutes. "Left!" she mind-spoke to Cloak.
The cloud began to gather speed.

Something glinted in the trees. Noxy lay flat on Cloak and took a deep
breath. Grabbing the cloud firmly with both hands, she pushed her head
over the cloud's edge. "Stop! Stop!" she ordered. She waited. The
glint came again.

"Down, slowly," she mind-spoke. For a moment she almost convinced
herself that the tiny flashes of light had come from a small stream or
pool, but then she saw movement. A moment later she could make out
people and horses. It was the smugglers.

One of them looked up as the cloud's shadow fell across his face. Noxy
had just enough time to recognize Mukh before the skinny man
shouted. The smuggler next to him twisted around in his saddle and
aimed his bow at Cloak. Noxy jerked her head back. The arrow went
*sfffft!* through the air.

"Go! Go!" she mind-shouted at the cloud. Another arrow shot past the
edge of the cloud, and then Noxy shrieked as one tore through the
cloud only a few feet away from her.

They flew back along the road, around the hill. There were the
soldiers! "Look out!" Noxy shouted. They looked up. "Ambush! In the
trees!"

It was as if she had kicked a beehive. Suddenly the soldiers had their
swords in their hands, and were galloping forward. Noxy turned Cloak
in a wide arc and flew back over the battle. This time the smugglers
ignored her. A few arrows flew, but the first squad of soldiers came
crashing through the trees too quickly for the smugglers to get off a
second shot.

Outnumbered, and without the advantage of surprise, the smugglers
turned and tried to flee through the dense undergrowth. They didn't
make it very far. A few tried to fight as the soldiers caught up with
them, but most dropped their swords or bows and raised their hands.

"Yahoo!" Noxy shouted. "That's the—no, wait, over there! Over there!
He's getting away!" She pointed frantically at the road, trying to get
Cloak to go lower so that she could tell the soldiers that Mukh was
escaping. The smuggler had abandoned his horse, and was running down
the road toward the Blight. Every second step carried him twenty yards
or more. Noxy urged Cloak on, but Mukh and his one magic boot soon
outdistanced the cloud.

Noxy finally gave up, and turned the cloud back to where the soldiers
were collecting the defeated smugglers. She let Cloak float down
gently until they were just a few feet above the trees.

"Are you all right?" shouted a soldier.

"I was about to ask you the same thing," she shouted back.

The soldier grinned. "Any day you win a fight like this is a good
one," he said. His grin vanished. "But we have to keep moving. The
prince needs us."

"No, wait! That's not true! It was a trick!" Noxy saw the doubt on the
soldier's face, and on the other faces that had turned up to look at
her. She took a deep breath. "Sergeant Inambu is working with the
smugglers. I don't know where Prince Thokmay is, but you have to get
back to Apple Bridge right away. She's going to try to break the
spells on the dam!"

"What!?" the soldier exclaimed. "But—"

"Please, you have to believe me!" Noxy said urgently. "They're going
to destroy the whole town!"

She saw the doubt on the soldier's face. Her heart sank as he said, "I
don't believe it. Not the sergeant. You can't be right."

"Please!" Noxy pleaded. "How do you think they knew to wait for you
here? Just send some of your troops back to the dam. You'll see!"

Before the soldier could reply, Noxy mind-ordered Cloak back into the
sky and headed for Apple Bridge.

Meanwhile, back in town, Dolly and Mope made their way toward the dam
through the wreckage left by the tornado. They stopped only once, to
help get an overturned wagon the right side up so that it could be
moved out of the street.

They were still two blocks away from the dam when Mope pulled up
short. "What's that?" he asked, clocking his head to one side. "That
sound…" He looked grim. "She's chanting. It's started."

They ran as fast as their awkward gait would carry them to the dam
road. As they came around the last corner, they saw Sergeant Inambu
standing in the middle of the wooden walkway that ran along the top of
the dam. Her arms were raised, and her voice echoed around them with
unnatural clarity. The air in front of her shimmered with a faint blue
light that grew stronger even as Mope and Dolly watched.

"Stay here!" Mope told his mother. He scooped up a stone from the
road, hefted it, and threw it at the sergeant as hard as he could. He
grabbed two more while the first was still in the air and charged onto
the walkway.

His first stone hit Sergeant Inambu in the shoulder. She stumbled
forward, nearly falling off the dam into the Trout below. Mope threw
another stone on the run. Sergeant Inambu ducked, but the stone went
wide anyway.

The sergeant straightened up and made a backhanded gesture at
Mope. The rock that had hit her leaped into the air and flew at
Mope. It hit Mope in the middle of his chest with the force of a
hammer, knocking him off his feet. Sergeant Inambu gestured again, and
a thin sheet of flame raced across the dam. Mope rolled sideways with
a yelp, feeling a blast of heat as the fire singed his hair.

He scrambled onto his feet. Sergeant Inambu had drawn her sword. Mope
feinted left, then right, then lunged at her. The point of her sword
followed his every move. He had to pull up short to avoid being
spitted.

"It looks like a stand-off," he puffed. "I can't get past your blade,
but you can't look away from me to cast your spells."

"I don't have to look away," Sergeant Inambu said. "I just have to give
it a bit… more… *effort*…"

Suddenly the air started to sparkle again, brighter and brighter. Mope
heard a roaring sound. Something dark, a shadow that somehow wasn't
quite there, was piling up against the brightness in the air. A smell
like swamp mud and lightning mixed together was suddenly all around
them. The dam rumbled as the spells that held it together began to
break.

"You'll kill us both!" Mope shrieked.

"Small… price…" Sergeant Inambu gasped. Mope heard something splash
in the river below, and heard a bellow of triumph as whatever it was
broke through the spells and headed down the Trout. The smell in the
air around him was getting stronger and stronger.

Mope feinted again, but the sergeant's swordpoint followed him like a
cobra. He took a deep breath—

—and a pale form on four legs bounded past him and leaped for the
sergeant's throat. Sergeant Inambu screamed as Edward's ghost slammed
into her, knocking her onto her knees.

"*My* town!" the ghost snarled. It leaped at her again, howling as
Sergeant Inambu's sword cut deep into its shoulder. Ghostly blood
poured out of the wound like smoke. The dog howled. It gathered itself
up for one last leap—

—and Dolly swung up onto the bridge behind Sergeant Inambu, waddled
forward two steps, and thumped her hard on the back of the head.

The sergeant dropped like a sack of potatoes. The sparkles in the air
flared like fireworks, and then were gone.

Edward's ghost stood over the fallen soldier, growling low in its
throat. It raised its nose and sniffed the air, then half-turned its
head toward Mope. "Humans," it snorted as its began to fade. "They
just don't understand…"

"Mother! Mother, are you all right?" The younger troll hopped
awkwardly over Sergeant Inambu and hugged his mother. They were both
crying, he realized. When had he started crying?

"Oh, Mope," Dolly sniffed. "I thought—I thought I was going to lose
you." She squeezed him tight. "Your father would have been so proud."

Mope hugged his mother back. "Thank you," he said. "He'd be proud of
you too."

</section>
<section markdown="1">

## Chapter 16: The Bear's Choice

Rust and the prince and princess floated on in silence. The only other
raft they saw was being pulled upriver by two weary donkeys. The bear
ordered Prince Thokmay and Princess Ogmin to hide in the lean-to, and
then sat in front of it and grunted a hello as it passed.

As the other raft passed, the prince and princess could hear one of
the raftsmen singing a slow, sad song. The words floated over the
river to them like wisps of cloud in a blue summer sky. "Oooh, just
one time… I would take the northwest passage…"

"Sergeant Dorbu used to sing that one," Prince Thokmay whispered in his
sister's ear. "It was so beautiful, sometimes I thought the trees were
going to tear out their roots so that they could come closer and
listen."

"Did they ever?" she whispered back.

The prince smiled and shook his head. "No, they never needed to. The
sergeant always sang loudly enough."

Rust waited until they rounded the next bend before letting the prince
and princess come out. The two humans sat down near the bow once
again. A moment later, Princess Ogmin squeaked and grabbed her
brother as the raft suddenly lurched and began bobbing up and down.

The prince looked back to see what the bear was doing, but Rust was
looking back as well. "What's wrong?" he asked. "What's happening?"

"I don't know," the bear rumbled. She sniffed at the air. "But I can
smell something. Something *bad*."

They heard it before they saw it. A roiling two-foot crest of water,
darker than it had any right to be and somehow managing to hold itself
together, was sweeping down the width of the Trout. "Hold on!" Rust
bellowed.

The wave hit the rear of the raft like a charging rhinoceros. Prince
Thokmay nearly tumbled into the river as the raft tilted forward, then
righted itself. Princess Ogmin screamed in terror. Dark water from the
wave had splashed up over the rear of the raft onto the logs and
formed small pools. Even as they watched, the pools oozed together to
form a stream, which flowed *up* over the lip of the raft to get back
into the Trout.

"Don't let it touch you!" Rust said. "It's Blighted!"

The raft was going faster now. "Up ahead!" the prince said suddenly.
"That island! We can steer for that!" He leaped to his feet and leaned
against the steering board. The raft barely noticed.

"RRAAAAWWWWRRR!" Rust roared. She lumbered over to the steering board
and leaned her shoulder against it. Reluctantly, the raft began to
turn.

"More! More!" the prince called, trying to gauge their speed and
direction. "A little more! Hold it there! Brace yourself!"

The raft crashed through the reeds on the upstream side of the island
and ground to a halt in its muddy bank. Rust stumbled, but kept her
footing. The prince and princess were thrown right off the raft onto
the muddy little patch of land. The dark water raced past on either
side of them as they scrambled to their feet.

Suddenly the water knocked the raft sideways. Rust barely had time to
leap over onto the island before the raft went hurtling away.

The three castaways watched it go. "What's happening?" the prince
asked. He put his arm around his sister, then hugged her, trying to
stop her shaking.

"Something must have happened to the dam in Apple Bridge," the bear
replied. She reared up on her hind legs to get a last glimpse of the
raft, then fell back on all fours. "That's the last we'll see of our
food, or your blankets."

Prince Thokmay managed a grim smile. "I guess we're all prisoners now."
The bear just snarled.

"Look!" Princess Ogmin suddenly said, pointing upstream. "Someone's
coming!"

It took the prince a moment to figure out what he was seeing. At first
he thought it was a bird, but then he realized it was a man, skipping
or hopping twenty yards at a time. Another moment, and he saw that it
was Mukh.

"What's *he* doing here?" Rust snarled.

"Oh, now, be polite," Prince Thokmay told her, feeling almost
giddy. "He *is* your business partner."

Another dozen lopsided steps brought the skinny smuggler to the little
island. "Well hello!" Mukh said jauntily. His jacket was torn and
muddied, and he had dark circles under his eyes. He held up a lock of
Princess Ogmin's hair. "Glad to see it still works."

"What do you want?" Rust growled. "We had a deal."

"Oh yes, yes, a deal," Mukh nodded vigorously. He looked
around. "You also had a raft, didn't you? Whatever happened to it?"

"What happened to the dam?" Prince Thokmay broke in. "We saw the
wave…"

"Oh, the dam, the dam," Mukh said with a wave of his hand. "The dam
is still there, I dare say. The river would be a *lot* more lively
right now if Inambu had managed to bring it down. It's a shame—we
worked a long time for this."

"Inambu?" the prince said blankly. "Sergeant Inambu?"

"Oh, yes, *Sergeant* Inambu," Mukh agreed. He sighed. "I don't
suppose she could have survived. She got that from our mother, you
know. She never learned how to give up either."

"Enough!" Rust snarled. "What do you want?"

Mukh blinked. "Why, the princess, of course," he said. He shrugged
off his shoulder pack and pulled out a loop of cord. "I imagine half
of Loghan is going to be looking for me shortly. I'll need a hostage
to see myself safely away to Chaghan." He paused. "Or maybe Barra
Bantang," he corrected himself. "I've always liked the beach."

He splatted the mud a couple of times with the toe of his lone magic
boot. "I could probably carry them both if I'd ever found the other
one of these, but as it is…" He shrugged.

"The princess is mine!" Rust growled. "We had a bargain!"

"Yes, yes, a bargain," Mukh agreed absently. "But things have
changed. Anyway, you'll still have the prince. He'd be far too much
trouble for me to carry—far too likely to try to be a hero. Biting
off his head will do you as much good as biting off hers."

"She's *mine!*" the bear roared.

Suddenly Mukh had a knife in his hand, a knife whose blade flickered
like the tongue of a snake. "Now, dear," Mukh said kindly, "We've
worked *so* well together. Please don't spoil it now." He tossed the
loop of cord to Prince Thokmay. "Tie her up," he directed.

Much to his own surprise, the prince laughed. "No," he said flatly.

"Tch, tch," Mukh clucked, keeping his eyes on Rust. "If you don't, I
will, and I'll be *much* less gentle than you."

"Thokmay?" Princes Ogmin quavered. "What does he want?"

Prince Thokmay picked up the coil of rope and flung it back at the
smuggler. "I said no," he repeated.

Mukh shrugged. "I'm sorry," he said lightly to Rust. "It looks like
you won't be left with a hostage after all." As quick as a snake, he
twisted and lunged at the prince with the magic knife.

Prince Thokmay cried out and stepped back as the knife's blade whipped
out. It grazed his shoulder, and instantly his whole arm went numb
with cold. "Stand aside, boy," Mukh hissed. "Stand aside, or—"

The prince and princess never got to hear the rest of the smuggler's
threat. With a huge roar, Rust charged at Mukh. The smuggler spun
and stabbed with the magic knife again, but Rust's weight carried her
forward even as it bit into her. Mukh shrieked as they fell backward
into the dark Blight water.

"No!" he screamed. He struggled toward the shore. She roared again and
knocked him sideways with a tremendous blow. Even as she did so, the
Blight water bunched up around them, forming hundreds of dark strands
that bound them like a net and pulled them down. Mukh screamed again
as the river pulled him under. Rust roared, straining to break free.

Prince Thokmay ran forward and grabbed the coil of rope he had thrown
back at Mukh. "Take it!" he shouted, throwing one end at Rust. The
bear lunged at it and caught it in her teeth. The prince dug in his
heels and pulled as hard as he could.

He felt Princess Ogmin's arms go around his waist. Together they
leaned back, further, further, and then suddenly the rope snapped and
Rust was pulled under. The water roiled for a moment, then went still.

The prince watched dumbly as the river sucked in Rust's end of the
rope. A few heartbeats later, the only sign that the smuggler and the
bear had ever been on the little island were their footprints.

He suddenly realized that Princess Ogmin was crying. "Sh, sh," he
said, putting his arm around her and patting her shoulder
absent-mindedly. "It's all right. It's all right. It's over." He
looked at the dark water lapping higher and higher against the sides
of their little patch of mud.

The river rose a thumb's width at a time. A ragged shark's fin half as
tall as Prince Thokmay circled the island a few times, then headed
downstream in search of more accessible prey. Something else sparkled
across the dark Blightwater like a rainshower, and a few moments later
the prince thought he saw huge clawed footprints appear and disappear
on the river's surface.

"I want to go home," Princess Ogmin whispered.

"We will," the prince promised, wondering if there was still a home to
go to. He took a deep breath, trying to judge the distance to the
shore, and wondering how you distracted a whole river. It was
hopeless. Ogmin could manage nothing more than a dog paddle. Even if
the river had been as peaceful as the fish pond they had paddled their
feet in when they were little, she wouldn't have been able to make
it. Hot tears of anger and frustration welled up in his eyes.

"..our..ighness.." Prince Thokmay looked up at the sound. Could the
Blightwater talk?

"…here…" He looked wildly around, and then up. Cloak was racing
toward them, dropping as it approached. Noxy and Sergeant Gyalpa waved
at him from the cloud's back.

"Over here!" he shouted. He waved his arms and laughed. "We're over
here!" Ogmin looked up and shrieked, then started waving her arms as
well.

*Down!* Noxy mind-ordered Cloak. The Blightwater was still rising,
faster now as it sensed that its prey might escape it.

*Bad!* the cloud thought back emphatically. *Bad!*

*Down!* Noxy ordered again, but try as she might, she couldn't get
Cloak to drop down any further.

"She won't do it!" Noxy said in despair. "She's too scared!"

"You just have to get us close enough for this," the sergeant said,
uncoiling the rope he'd brought.

Noxy brought Cloak in low over the little island so that the sergeant
could lower one end of the rope. "Hurry up, Your Highness!" he
bellowed.

"Can you lift us both?" the prince shouted back. "We're a bit short on
time down here."

"Blazes," the sergeant cursed. "No!" he shouted. "But if you can both
hang on, we can get you to shore."

Prince Thokmay grabbed the free end of the rope and tied it under his
sister's armpits, then lifted her arms. "Hold on really, really
tight," he told her, putting her hands on the rope. "No matter what
happens. All right?"

"All right," she said in a small voice.

He kissed her cheek. "You're very brave," he told her. "When we get
back to Apple Bridge, I'll buy you all the beaver tails you can eat, I
promise." He reached up and grabbed the rope himself, then shouted,
"Ready!"

Sergeant Gyalpa wrapped his end of the rope behind his back and sat
down on the cloud with his legs spread. "All right," he said to Noxy.
Noxy pursed her lips and flashed an angry command at the cloud. Cloak
lifted slowly, then swung toward the riverbank.

"We're up!" the prince shouted. For a moment everything seemed to be
working, but then suddenly they dropped down a hand's breadth.

"I can't get a footing!" the sergeant yelled. Noxy watched in horror
as his feet slid deeper and deeper into the cloud under the weight of
the prince and princess. The rope was cutting into Cloud as well,
making a deep rift that slowly let Thokmay and Ogmin drop further and
further toward the river.

"Just a few more heartbeats!" Noxy yelled. "Thokmay, hang on! Hang on!"

"Lift up your feet," Thokmay grunted at his sister. He could *smell*
the Blightwater, it was so close.

"I'm scared!" Ogmin said.

"Just lift up your feet, it's going to be all right," he told her. Ten
yards… eight… five…

His heels splashed into the river. "Run!" he shouted at his sister. A
hundred tiny tendrils tugged at his boots as he pushed her through the
reeds toward the bank. The soft mud underneath them seemed to be
coming alive. They scrambled up, grabbing bushes and branches and
dandelions and anything else that offered a handhold, until finally
they reached the top of the riverbank and flopped down.

Prince Thokmay lay there for a moment, panting, then rolled over and
started untying the knot around his sister. "Thokmay?" she asked.

"Mm hm?" he gasped as he undid the last of the knot.

"I *really* want to go home."

</section>
<section markdown="1">

## Epilog: The End of the Letter

*Your Majesty,* Thokmay began, as always. Then he paused, listening to
the rain tap against the window as he wondered one more time what it
would have been like to grow up calling his father something a little
less formal than that. Ogmin was singing to herself in the next room,
and he could hear Dolly's voice as well, although he couldn't make out
what she was saying.

He dipped his pen in the inkwell and continued. *1. I am writing to
inform you that my tutor has decided to leave your service to pursue
opportunities elsewhere. I have been well pleased with him,
particularly during the recent difficulties described in the reports
which I trust you have by now received. Unless I am instructed
otherwise, I shall commend him to future patrons.*

Although I probably won't need to do so soon, Thokmay added
mentally. He had tried to talk the troll out of leaving, but Mope
had made up his mind. "It's time I did something as myself," Mope had
said, his face even longer than usual. "I've been trying to train you
like the circus man trained my father. It's time I did a few of my own
tricks for a change."

"Where will you go?" Thokmay asked.

The troll twiddled his big toes. "Former or Latter Tongsa,
perhaps, or Chaghan. Or maybe even Garheim. Anyone can argue the law
in Garheim."

"Argue the law?" "Garheim?" Noxy and the prince asked simultaneously.

"Absolutely," Mope said earnestly. "Eloquence and logic, logic and
eloquence, that's the key. Did you know that gifted animals still
aren't allowed to own land in Former Tongsa? They can in Chaghan, but
they need a human's permission to marry. And there was a monstrous
case in Garheim, Your Highness will remember we discussed it some
months ago, which concluded that—"

"Enough, enough," the prince laughed. "If anyone can talk the world
into better shape, you can." On an impulse he hugged his tutor.

"I'll miss you," he said softly.

The troll hugged him back clumsily. "And I you, Your Highness," he
said. "You had a pretty good sense of humor, for a human."

The ink on Thokmay's pen had dried. He wiped it carefully on a scrap of
paper, then dipped it in the inkwell again. *2. Noxy of Stale has
rejoined her companions. They are returning to the mountains for the
winter, but I have taken the liberty of extending her the freedom of
Loghan, and have invited her to visit the capital whenever she might
choose to do so.*

"Or something like that," the prince muttered under his breath. The
other cloudherds had flown into Apple Bridge the day before. They had
been appalled by the destruction, and Aft had been furious when she
had learned of the part that Noxy had played.

"Cloak could have been torn to shreds!" Aft raged. "And you too!
You could have been killed!"

Noxy folded her arms and glared at the older woman. "Or half of Loghan
could have been flooded with poisonous old magic. Or Princess Ogmin
could have drowned when her raft floated away." That was the story the
prince, Sergeant Gyalpa, and Noxy had agreed on during the flight back
to Apple Bridge—the princess had been playing on a raft, and it had
floated away. Mope had thanked them for that. "Or I could have tripped
over a pebble and broken my nose. Would you have liked that more?"

Neither saw the amused looks on the other cloudherds' faces, but the
prince did. "We are of course grateful for Noxy's assistance in this
matter," he said hastily in his most soothing official voice. On an
impulse, he took off his signet ring and offered it to the young
cloudherd. "In recognition of which, we offer her the freedom of
Loghan, so that she may travel throughout the kingdom without
hindrance, and call upon His Majesty's servants for aid as she may
require." For the first time, the prince was glad that Mope had made
him practice that speech so many times, so that he could say it
without stumbling.

Aft had glowered at the prince and Noxy as the young cloudherd had
taken the bracelet and put it on her own arm, but the other cloudherds
had clapped. It was a rare honor, they all knew, for someone to be
given the freedom of the kingdom.

Noxy and the prince said their real good-byes an hour later. "I'm glad
you let me stay," Noxy said, stroking Cloak's flank, somehow not quite
able to meet the prince's eyes.

Prince Thokmay realized that she felt as awkward as he did, but that
didn't make him feel any better. "I'm glad too," he said. He paused a
moment, then added, "Even if all of this hadn't happened, I'd be
glad." He waved at her a few moments later as Cloud climbed into the
sky, breathless at how soft her lips had been.

There was a clatter next door. "Excuse me, Your Highness," Dolly
called out, "But will Her Highness be needing her summer dresses, or
may I put them in storage?"

"Pack everything, please," Prince Thokmay replied loudly. "We won't be
coming back."

There was a moment's silence, and then the door to the prince's study
slowly creaked open. Princess Ogmin peeked around the door. She was
still wearing a dark brown silk scarf on her head, despite the number
of times Dolly and the prince had told her how grown-up her short hair
made her look.

"Are we going home?" Ogmin asked.

"Mm hm," the prince said. He tried to smile at her, but it wouldn't
stay on his face. "We really are."

"Wheee!" Ogmin shrieked. She bounded into the room and hugged him.
"We're going home!"

"Whoa, whoa!" he laughed, "Watch out for the inkpot!" He hugged her
tight, so that he could wipe his eyes without her seeing him do it,
then let her go. "But only if you help Dolly pack, all right?"

"I'll help!" she promised. She ran out of the room. "Did you hear? Did
you?" he heard her say.

It wasn't Dolly who answered. "What's 'home'?" Inambu asked
uncertainly. Prince Thokmay stared down at his letter as Princess
Ogmin tried to explain. The sergeant had been unconscious for two
entire days after the fight at the dam. When she had awaken, her mind
had been as clear and as empty as a baby's. It had only taken her a
few days to remember how to feed herself, but her progress since then
had been slow. She seemed to remember nothing of her former life, and
her former apprentices said she probably never would.

Princess Ogmin was still in the middle of her description of the
wonderful things to eat in the capital when Inambu interrupted. "Do you
think we should call this one Rose?" she asked. "Or Lily?" The prince
could imagine her holding up one of Ogmin's many dolls.

"Lily," the princess said decisively. "Because her hair is so
beautiful."

The prince smiled and turned back to his letter and wrote, *3. As
there is no longer an immediate threat to Apple Bridge, and as I
believe your daughter would be happier in the familiar surroundings of
the capital, I am returning to Loghan with her at the earliest
opportunity.* He had lain in bed most of the previous night, watching
the moon rise and then set, trying to work up the courage to write
those words. For a moment, he imagined himself crumpling up the letter
and starting a new one. Instead, he took a deep breath, drew a
diagonal line across the empty space on the page, and at the bottom
wrote, *Your dutiful*.

He hesitated only a moment before adding, for the first time, *and
loving*, then finished, *son, Thokmay Loghan-o Prince*. He let his breath
out with a whoosh, put his pen back in the inkwell, folded the letter,
dripped some wax on it, and pressed his signet ring into the wax to
seal it. Then he leaned back in his chair and stretched like a cat.

Years later, when his hair was starting to turn gray and the scar the
world's last wolf had left in his arm ached in cold weather, Prince
Thokmay finally heard what had happened when his father had received
that letter. "He just smiled," the old steward said to him. "Like he
used to sometimes before your mother passed away." But there are many
more stories to tell before that one.

</section>
