Whatever she might have thought or said next
was interrupted by a staccato trio of whistle toots.
Dockety spun its head around.
"The Regulators are here."
Its head snapped back into position.
"Do you want to hide?"

"What?
Why would I—"
Maddy started,
but it was already too late.
Special Blazes had come around the corner with Bee Six Vee behind him.

The Regulator touched a finger to the brim of his hat.
"Morning," he said.
"Hope I'm not interrupting anything."

"Our conversation had just terminated,"
Dockety replied,
its voice buzzing slightly.
"Is there something you require?"

The corner of the tiger's mouth quirked up.
"You know what I like most about bots?
It's how direct you all are.
No havering,
nothing about the weather or how are the kids,
just straight to the point.
Isn't that right, Bee?"
The mulebot stamped the ground twice with one of its forefeet.

"Is there something you require?"
Dockety repeated.

Special Blazes nodded.
"Matter of fact, there is.
We're planning on doing a bit of scouting up along by Heck.
I was hoping you'd be interested in joining us."

Maddy knew how quickly bots could think.
She also knew how much thinking it took to talk to people—Dockety and Special Leaf
had explained it to her and Gumption and Sindy one afternoon
when the bot failed once again to understand a joke.
Each word could mean a dozen different things,
and that was before you calculated tone and speed
and the hesitations between them—all the things that
people noticed without consciously paying attention to them.
Multiplying all those possibilities together
meant there were millions of ways to say the wrong thing
or to say things the wrong way.

She therefore wasn't surprised when Dockety didn't answer immediately.
Neither,
it seemed,
was Special Blazes.
After a few moments he cocked an eyebrow,
but other than that
there was just the usual mechanical sounds
of bots turning trees into boards and boards into whatever the townspeople needed.

"That is an unexpected request,"
Dockety finally buzzed.

Special Blazes shrugged.
"I'm surprised that you're surprised.
You know your way through the Mire and up along the Makers' road
a lot better than we do.
Plus,
helping out might make some folk feel more comfortable about
what you all are building here."
His gesture took in the bots and their camp alike.

Dockety's lenses rotated.
"Are people uncomfortable with our presence?"

Special Blazes' smile didn't reach his eyes.
"I think some of them aren't quite sure where your loyalties lie."

"My loyalty lies with my friends and with free bots everywhere."
Dockety's voice was as calm as ever,
but a double dozen paces away,
Crusher chose that exact moment to disconnect from the charging post
with an audible *clunk*.

The fur stood up on the back of Maddy's neck,
but Special Blazes didn't so much as glance at the hauler bot
as it rolled over to join them on its heavy treads.
"Then help us free more bots,"
the Regulator said levelly.
He patted the mulebot beside him.
"Like I told Miz Roo here,
Bee Six Vee here has saved my life more times than I can count.
Can't think of anything I wouldn't do for it."
He shrugged again.
"Wouldn't hurt you and yours to be owed that kind of favor."

Maddy didn't see or hear a signal pass between Dockety and Crusher,
but after another moment of silence
the hauler bot turned and rolled away.
"This one will consider it,"
Dockety said.

"I want to come to,"
Maddy burst out.
"My papa is in Heck somewhere,
and if you're going there—"

Special Blazes held up a hand to stop her.
"With respect,
Miz Roo,
this is going to be dangerous work,"
he said firmly.
"We can look for your father better than you can."

"I don't think you can."
Maddy pulled the discombobulator from her pocket
and held it up for the Regulator to see.

He frowned.
"Now, what is that, exactly?"

Maddy swallowed hard.
"Ask your friend,"
she said,
then pressed the button.

The mulebot scuttled backward.
Its two front legs came up and pointed at Maddy,
hooked blades sprouting from them.

"Whoa, whoa!"
Special Blazes stepped between them, his ears back.
"What did you do?"

Maddy released the button and jerked her chin at Bee Six Vee.
"Go on, ask it."

The Regulator looked at the mulebot.
Bright squiggles scrolled across the screen on its front.
Special Blazes frowned.
"Really?"
More squiggles scrolled past.

He turned to Maddy and held out his hand.
"May I?"

She wanted to say "no",
but she knew that would earn a "no" in return,
so she handed him the heavy little piece of tech.
Special Blazes frowned at it,
turned it over in his hands a couple of times,
then turned back to Bee Six Vee.

"Like this?" he asked.
He pressed the button.

Squiggles.
"Huh."
He looked at Maddy.
"Is there a trick to it?"

She shook her head.
"Not that I know."

He hefted it again.
"Mind me asking how you came by this?"

"A bunch of stuff came down the river the day we found Dockety,"
she said,
which was technically true even if it had nothing to do with the discombobulator.

The tiger nodded slowly.
"Well, ain't that a thing?"
He held it out to her.
"First rule of being a Special,"
he said when she hesitated.
"Never touch someone else's tech."

"I'm not—" she started, then stopped as the realization hit her.
She had a piece of tech and it worked for her.
She *was* a Special.

"I'll need to think on this,"
Special Blazes said.
"And you best think on my offer,"
he continued to Dockety.
"We're heading out first thing day after tomorrow."
He touched a finger to the brim of his hat again,
turned,
and walked away.
The mulebot pivoted and followed him
with its razored forelegs still in the air.

Maddy slumped slightly as the two Regulators rounded the corner
and were lost among the trees.
"Well," she said uncertainly,
then stopped and looked at the discombobulator again.
She couldn't be a Special—that was Sindy's job.
She drew things.
There was nothing special about that.

"We have to help,"
Dockety buzzed.
"If we do not and their effort fails,
we will be blamed."

"Huh?"

"We will be blamed if anything goes wrong,"
Dockety repeated flatly.
"They will say it was our fault for not going.
And if we are there,
they will also say it was our fault."
Its lenses rotated back and forth a couple of times.

Maddy had spent enough time with the bot to know that meant it was angry.
"So what's it like being in charge?"
she asked,
trying to make it a joke.

Dockety pivoted its head to look at
the homes the bots had built for themselves.
"It would be easier if this one was like Patient in Darkness
and did not care what happened to others.
That is why you must not come.
This one does not want you harmed."

"I appreciate that,"
Maddy said,
"But it's my papa we're talking about.
What wouldn't you do for Crusher?"

The bot's manipulator clacked.
"Your analogy is compelling," it admitted.
"Will you inform your mother?"

Maddy snorted.
"Absolutely not."

</section>

<section markdown="1">

## All Together

There was a small barn on the edge of town that people called the trading post.
Years back,
Lupus Wolf (who wasn't yet Mayor Lupus) had cleaned it out
and laid split logs down for a floor
in the hope of making Rusty Bridge a fair town.
They'd never managed to attract enough peddlars and tinkers and what-not for that,
but whenever someone did come through—a glazier with panes of glass for mending windows,
a tinsmith with a portable furnace for melting solder—they
would set up there for a day or a week.

"You'd almost think they'd done this before,"
Zeke Bear said to no one in particular,
picking the remains of his lunch out of his teeth with a yellowing claw.
The Regulators had left the barn doors open to let the light in,
and a small crowd had gathered to watch
as they prepared for their expedition.
Food:
the Regulators preferred things that were dense,
rectangular,
and would keep for several days,
which meant pemmican, dried fruit, and seed bars.
"And coffee—make sure they have coffee,"
Gumption heard the rabbit tell Meribeth,
who grunted as she rearranged the provisions for the umpteenth time.

Batteries:
Bee Six Vee had a complete spare set.
Gumption spent a moment trying to figure out what they were worth
and gave up.
Just one battery could keep his family's house warm through an entire winter.
The set of four cabled to the charging post could probably *buy* the house.

Bandages and spare parts:
the Bee Six Vee took them out of the saddle bags on its sides
and laid them out on one of the tables
for the rabbit to inspect.
"They's fine,"
he said without looking up from the letter he was writing.

Bee Six Vee bleeped.
"Yes, I's sure," the rabbit said patiently.
"They's fine when I packed 'em,
they's fine now,
they be fine if an' when we need 'em."
The scars on his muzzle wrinkled his fur
as he smiled at the mulebot.
"An' if they isn't,
well,
I will apologize to th' wounded personal-like."

"Children!"
Miz Winnie's sharp voice made half the adults in the crowd jump.
"Children,
school started half an hour ago.
I'm sure whatever's happening here will still be happening when we're done."

"Aww…"
Gumption joined the ragged chorus.
Maddy and Sindy didn't,
for the very good reason that neither of them were there.
"I can't get anything together while mama and Sindy are in the house,"
Maddy had told Gumption.
"I'm going to say I need a day because of womanly things.
You walk Sindy down to Special Leaf's,
and I'll pack stuff up while mama's out doing chores."
He hadn't minded much that she hadn't bothered to say please,
but after seeing Sindy safely to the Special's,
school had been about as appealing as a moldy biscuit.

"Come along, quickly now!"
Miz Winnie clapped her hands.

"Actual-like,
miz,
before y'all go,
I's wonderin' if I could beg a moment from you?"
the rabbit said,
pitching his voice to carry
"I got a grammactical problem here's been worryin' at me,
an' I'd be grateful for advice."
He held up the letter he had been writing.

"I'm sorry, you have a *grammatical* problem?"
Miz Winnie asked disbelievingly.

The rabbit sucked in his cheeks.
"Well, I'm pretty sure I's spelled all the words right,
so it's gotta be the grammatics that's wrong?"
He cleared his throat.
"I,
Thoughtful Rabbit,
Regulator Second Class,
under the command of Special Blazes Tiger,
Regulator First Class with Distinction—they just gave him
that bit last year—um,
right,
where was I?"

He cleared his throat again.
"I,
Thoughtful et cetera,
do solemnly attest that this letter constitutes
the entirety of my post mortem wishes,
and that it does supercede all prior testaments making such a claim.
I just copied that part,
so I's pretty sure it's aright,"
he continued in a normal voice.
"It's the next bits what're makin' my head grumble."

"I'm sorry, but are you writing you will?"
Miz Winnie asked disbelievingly.

"Yes miz,"
the rabbit nodded.
"Do it every time we go out.
We all do,
ain't that right,
Bee?"
The mulebot bleeped.

"It ain't just in case of meetin' the Makers an' all,"
Thoughtful explained.
"It's powerful efficacious for focusin' the mind.
Why,
I bet if all these good children was to sit down and write out
how they'd like their belongings distributed
in th' sorry event of their demise,
an' what final message they'd like to send their families,
well…"
He winked at her.
"I imagine that would hold their interest for a moment or two."

Miz Winnie stared at him for a moment.
*Is she blushing?* Gumption wondered incredulously.

But then she clapped her hands briskly.
"All right, children,"
she said in an absolutely-no-nonsense voice
that straightened every spine within hearing range.
"Back to school *now*.
We have some writing to do."

In the end the scouting party numbered eight.
All four Regulators were included:
Special Blazes,
Meribeth,
Thoughtful,
and Bee Six Vee,
but the mulebot wasn't the ponderous baggage carrier that had arrived in Rusty Bridge.
Meribeth spent the afternoon removing some of its side panels
and unbolting the heavy metal crates on its back.
By dinner-time,
the bot resembled an armored scorpion without a tail.

Everyone expected Crusher would join the party,
but Dockety said no.
"Too slow off roads, and too visible everywhere,"
the latter buzzed.
Crusher flashed its arguments on its screen too faster for organic eyes to follow
before trundling away in a two-ton huff.

In its place,
Dockety chose Able the mailbot and a little helibot that went by the name Flowers.
The mailbot would carry supplies past the Mire to the edge of Heck
and wait for the party there.
Flowers would be their eyes,
but would also stay well clear of the bot city.
The machines in Heck had sharp eyes that never blinked.
Even at night,
something airborne would be too easy a target to be safe.

The final and most surprising member of the party was Special Leaf.
"They have a better chance of coming back if they go with someone who has done this before,"
the old tortoise explained to Mayor Lupus.

"I reckon there's a story and a half in that,"
the old wolf said,
one ear flicking back.

Special Leaf smiled.
"I wasn't always this boring."

Gumption kept his head down and continued sweeping Special Leaf's porch.
*I'm not here, I'm not here, I'm not here,*
he repeated in his head with each swoosh of the broom.
The Roo sisters were sulking inside,
Maddy because Special Blazes had decided she wasn't allowed to join them
despite the discombobulator
and Sindy because the discombobulator wouldn't work for her.
"I don't need a bot to know if it works,"
the younger girl had said petulantly when she finally gave up
and tossed it back onto Special Leaf's kitchen table.
"I can feel when something turns on for me,
and this stupid thing's as dead as a doornail."

Special Leaf finally shooed them out of the house.
Halfway home,
Maddy nudged her sister and said,
"You go on ahead.
Tell mama I'll be along shortly."

Sindy looked from her to Gumption and made a disgusted face.
"Eww.
Take all the time you want."
She flounced away.

"You, uh, you have something particular in mind?"
Gumption asked Maddy as casually as he could.
It was a warm evening,
and—

"Come on,"
Maddy said,
hitching her bag up on her shoulder and setting off at a brisk pace
without looking back to see if he was following.
"We have to find Mouse."
Gumption sighed and hurried after her,
ignoring the warning twinge in his ribs.

The little cleaning bot wasn't by the charging post in Rusty Bridge,
or by the bridge itself,
or anywhere else they looked.
Gumption suggested they check the bots' camp,
but Maddy shook her head.
"It never goes along by there,"
she said dismissively.
"I think it's a bit scared of the bigger bots."

In the end they found themselves on the path by the river,
halfway home to the Roos' house.
"This is where it all started,"
Gumption said as they reached the bend
where they had first encountered Dockety.
"Feels like a long time ago.
I wonder what woulda happened if—hey!"

He jumped back as a hexabot the size of a soup pot
skittered onto the path in front of them.

Maddy caught her breath.
"I know this one.
It's part of the hive!"

The little bot waved one of its forelegs,
then tapped the ground three times,
paused,
and tapped again just once.
Three and one,
three and one,
over and over.

Maddy glanced at Gumption,
who spread his hands helplessly.
"I'm sorry, we don't understand," she said,
crouching down.

She squeaked as the bot rushed forward
and grabbed the hem of her skirt with its wrench claw.
"I think it wants us to go with it,"
Gumption offered as the bot tugged at her.

"You think?"
Maddy said acidly.
"Aright, aright, I'm coming."

She followed the bot into the trees and Gumption followed her.
The ground was muddy underfoot in places.
The bot just scrambled around those without stopping,
leaving them to muck through the puddles as well as they could.

Maddy ducked under low-hanging branch.
Gumption lifted it out of his way to follow her,
then pulled up short.
"Huh," was all he could manage.

A dozen little bots—no, more than that—were waiting for them in a semi-circle
in a little clearing in the woods.
The hexabot they had followed clambered up the trunk of a fallen tree
and tucked its legs underneath itself like house cat.

The storkbot Maddy had encountered before stepped forward.
"Why are you not with the reconnaisance party?"
it demanded in a reedy voice
that reminded Gumption of a poorly-played harmonica.

"They didn't want me,"
Maddy replied bluntly.
"I showed them your discombobulator,
but Special Blazes said that bringing me along would be too risky."

A rustle ran through the assembled bots.
"We miscalculated,"
the storkbot warbled.
"We require another plan.
Do you have one?"

"Me? Uh uh.
How about you?"
she asked,
turning to Gumption.

"Well—"
was all the goat got out before Maddy continued,
"And even if we did,
Special Leaf's going to be with them,
and he'll send us back as soon as he sees us."

"Actually—" Gumption started.

"Much depends on this,"
the storkbot said as the other bots rustled and clacked.
"It is imperative that you find a way to get to Heck."

</section>
