---
layout: page
title: "In Heck"
fiction: true
---

<ol id="toc"></ol>

<section markdown="1">

## The Regulators

Maddy was sketching the willow tree in the center of the village square
when she heard one of the Ox brothers holler,
"Mail's coming!"
*Finally*, she thought,
giving her drawing one last critical look
before tucking her sketchbook and pencil into
the blue canvas satchel her father had made
for her tenth birthday—the last one she'd had
before he was kidnapped by marauding bots.
A lot had happened since then,
but at least now they knew he might still be alive.

"Waitin' on anything in particular?"
a familiar voice drawled behind her.

Maddy jumped, startled.
Mayor Lupus smiled down at her from the porch behind her,
a mug of tea in her hand.
It was a kindly smile,
but it still showed a lot of wolfish teeth.
"Mama sent off for some seeds," Maddy said.
"And my chores were all done, and—"

"—and it's a beautiful sunny day so why not sit for a bit?"
the old wolf finished, nodding agreeably.
She jerked her chin toward Maddy's bag.
"You're getting a lot better.
Your pa would be pleased."

"Thank you," Maddy mumbled.
The mayor had a way of looking at people that made them feel like she could read their mind.
Special Leaf said that was a big part of why the village had re-elected her so many times:
everyone who might have run against her felt guilty just thinking about it.

She waited on the steps of the mayor's house as a double handful of people gathered
to share gossip and small talk.
Zeke Bear had finally finished fixing the wall of the smokehouse
that had been knocked down during the bot attack a few months ago.
He still wasn't happy that the bots who had helped save them
had settled so close to Rusty Bridge,
but even he would admit that they were handy for fixing things up.
The apple orchard was draining properly for the first time in who knew how long,
and there wasn't a dull pair of scissors in town.

"It still just don't feel right,"
Mama Tumbly sighed theatrically.
"Taking charity from a bot, I mean."

Mayor Lupus swallowed the last of her tea
and tipped the dregs into the planter by her elbow.
"I reckon they figure being allowed to settle in beside us is payment enough,"
she said conversationally.
"That, and first look at whatever salvage comes down the river."

Mama Tumbly's whiskers twitched slightly under the rebuke.
It was no secret she wanted to be the next mayor,
but as Mama Roo had explained to Maddy,
"A lot of folks think it's time for a change,
but if she's the change,
they'd rather wait."

"Anyway, there it is, right on time,"
Mayor Lupus said as the mailbot came into view.
Eighty-Eight Able-Six ("but call me Able") looked like three metal boxes
perched preciously on top of one another
with a single small wheel up front
and two larger spoked cartwheels in the rear.
It only had one arm,
and like many of Rusty Bridge's refugee bots it had patches and welds from years of mending,
but Maddy's sister had made it a blue hat with a little tin badge,
and the bot wore it rain or shine.

Able bumped across the cobblestones,
braked,
backed up,
turned,
and doffed its hat.
"Good morning, one and all," it said jauntily,
replacing its hat and reaching around to open a hatch in its side.
"Got letters, got parcels, even got a newspaper from Sandy Bend."
Its periscope eyes swivelled one way and another as it began handing out what it had brought.

Someone bumped Maddy's elbow.
"Hey,"
Gumption said.

"Hey," she said back.
He had slicked back his fur again like some of the older goats, she noticed.
It made them look tough,
but on Gumption—she sighed to herself.
It had taken him months to heal after the attack.
Once he was back on his feet he'd started using the punching bag
in the yard beside the village school
and doing militia drills with a home-made pike.
She had hoped this would be the summer they went blackberry picking together,
just the two of them,
but "together" seemed to be the last thing on his mind.

Gumption jerked his chin at the mailbot.
"Anything for you?"

She was about to say, "Not yet,"
when Able called her name.
She traded a square glass penny for a letter in a plain brown envelope.
"Miz Madalena Roo, Resident in Rusty Bridge" was written in strong square letters on its front,
and a blue circle with Able's dot-and-dash ID inside it showed that it had been collected in good order.

Maddy took a deep breath.
"Well? You going to open it?"
Gumption asked.

She shook her head.
"Not here.
You want to go look in on Special Leaf?"

Gumption shrugged.
"Sure.
Is Sindy gonna be practicin' her magic tricks with him again?"

"Ssh!"
Maddy glanced around involuntarily,
but nobody was listening.
Only her family and Gumption and a couple of bots knew about her sister's special ability,
and Special Leaf was adamant that they keep it that way as long as they could.

Gumption shrugged again.
"Sorry," he muttered,
and then,
"Hey—look!"

Heads turned.
A murmur ran through the crowd.
"What in tarnation?" Mayor Lupus exclaimed
as two bots entered the square with a pair of muddy, sullen goats between them.

Dockety was in the lead,
its mis-matched arms swinging as it marched toward the crowd.
Its companion Crusher brought up the rear on its heavy treads,
and in between—

"Are those boys *tied up*?"
Mama Tumbly gasped,
her ears standing straight up in shock.

"Quiet down," Mayor Lupus said sharply.
The crowd parted to let her through.

"Morning," she said loudly,
"I thought Able had brought all the mail,
but it seems you all have something for us as well."

The lenses on the front of Dockety's head rotated a quarter turn
and then snapped back into position
with a faint *zick zick*.
"These ones were apprehended
while attempting to take items that do not belong to them,"
it said,
its voice buzzing slightly.
"We request punitive measures be applied to deter further attempts."

Mayor Lupus sucked in her cheeks.
"Is that right, boys?
Were you stealing?"

"We weren't stealin'!"
Bluster said vehemently.
"We were just tryin' to find out if they've been hidin' stuff from everyone,
and we did!
They got weapons stashed away!
All kinds of them!"

"I said quiet down!" Mayor Lupus snapped as the muttering started again.
"That's a pretty serious accusation, Bluster Goat.
You best be sure of your ground before you go making it."

"Bravo seen 'em too," Bluster said.
His twin brother nodded vigorously.
"Big pile of stuff laid out in one of those sheds they built.
All kinds tools and wires and stuff."

"Those are not weapons,"
Dockety buzzed.
"They are spare parts.
Many of us still require repairs."

"Spare parts my tail!" Bluster said hotly.
"They got a thing that looks like a zap gun,
and a buzz saw blade and all kinds.
They put 'em all together one night while we're sleepin'
and we'll all be in cage carts by sun-up!"

"Dockety?
Any of that true?"
the mayor asked.
Her tone was still casual,
but Maddy saw the way the mayor's ears flattened.

The bot's lenses rotated back and forth.
"These ones possess several saw blades," the bot acknowledged.
It gestured at Crusher.
"This one has been using one of them to clear brush,
and they required sharpening."

"And the zap gun?"

"It is not operational," Dockety said.
"But if we are able to repair it,
we will use it only for defensive purposes."

"Says *you*," someone said just loudly enough to be heard.

Mayor Lupus rapped her cane on the cobblestones.
"Operational or not,
it would have been neighborly of you to let us know you had that."

"Noted," Dockety said.
"We will do so in future."

"And you two,"
the mayor continued,
turning a cold glare on the goat twins.
"It's not your business to be poking around in other folks' business.
No,
no,
don't interrupt me,
that's just going to make me cranky.
They all have just as much right to be here now as anyone,
and more than you do if you behave like this.
You're both on ditch duty for the next month,
and if I catch so much as a whiff of you doing something this lump stupid again,
you'll be looking back on ditches like they were your first summer love.
You got that?"

Bluster opened his mouth to protest,
but snapped it shut when Bravo kicked the side of his leg.
"Yes'm," he said sullenly.

"Yes'm," his twin echoed.

"All right then.
Untie them—they won't bother you again."

"Thank you."
Bluster took an involuntary step back as Dockety spun around,
then glared at the bot as its mis-matched hands undid the knots
that held his arms in place.

"Let's get out of here," he snapped at his brother
once the other goat was free.
They stalked off side by side,
their boots clomping in time on the cobblestones.

"Those two make me *so* mad!"
Maddy grouched to Gumption as the crowd began to break up.
"They'd both be chained up in Heck or worse
if it weren't for Dockety."

"I guess,"
Gumption said noncommittally,
scuffing his boot on the cobblestones.

"You don't think so?"
Maddy demanded hotly.

"I didn't say that!"
Gumption protested.
"But—Mama Tumbly was by for tea yesterday,
and she and my ma and pa were all saying that
we don't really know much about them.
I'm not not saying I agree,"
he added hastily,
anticipating Maddy's outrage.
"But she was saying—Mama Tumbly, I mean—that they call us 'breathers'."

"Well we call 'em a lot worse than that,"
Maddy snapped.

Gumption threw up his hands.
"I don't!
I like having 'em here, you know that.
I'm just saying a lot of folks aren't as quick with change as you,
that's all."

Whatever Maddy might have said next was cut off
by a familir high-pitched voice.
"They're coming!
They're coming!"

She spun around as her little sister Sindy ran up to her
and bent over,
hands on her knees as she caught her breath.
"Who's—" Maddy started,
but Sindy straightened up,
eyes wide.

"Regulators!
Mama said to tell Special Leaf that there's Regulator's on the road
and coming this way!"

Maddy had just enough time to think,
*Oh no!*
before a voice hollered,
"Miz Mayor!
We got company!"
and four travelers came around the corner into the square,
each one looking more dangerous than the last.

The rabbit at the front had a long rifle on her shoulder
and a slouch hat pulled down low on her head.
The six-legged mulebot beside her had a squat turret for a head
and armor that put Special Leaf's shell to shame.
Behind them was a tiger,
an actual tiger with a black patch over one eye and a sword slung on his hip.
A bear carrying almost as many weapons as the mulebot brought up the rear.
She wore the same dark green jackets with black collars and cuffs
as the rabbit and tiger,
while the mulebot was painted in matching camouflage.

When Maddy thought about them afterward,
that was always the image that came to mind:
the one-eyed tiger and the rabbit in front,
the bear and the mulebot behind them.
The sunlight brought out the sweat stains and patches on their uniform jackets,
but somehow that made them more intimidating rather than less.

When they were ten steps away from the steps of the mayor's house
the tiger whistled,
short and sharp.
The Regulators took two more steps each and halted in perfect time.
A low murmur ran through the townspeople.

"Good morning," Mayor Lupus said,
inclining her head.
"And welcome to Rusty Bridge.
If I'd known you were coming,
I'd have put on a pot of tea."

"My apologies on that, miz mayor,"
the tiger replied cordially,
lisping slightly around his fangs.
"Too many places to be and too few of us to be in them all.
You know how it is."

"No apologies needed, Special…?"
She flicked an ear to make it a question.

"Blazes," the tiger supplied.
"Special Blazes, miz mayor, at your service."

The crowd let out its collective breath.
"I *told* you," someone said,
just loud enough to be heard.
Someone else shushed them.

Maddy swallowed hard,
forgetting for a moment about Gumption and Sindy and everything else.
Special Blazes was *famous*.
Every story in the newspaper about his exploits said so:
"The famous Special Blazes has triumphed again!"
The Case of the Snorkeling Smugglers,
the Shootout at Half a Hat,
his year-long pursuit of the villainous Mattock sisters—Maddy and Gumption had devoured them all.

Gumtpion turned to Maddy to say, "It's him! It's really him!"
When he saw the scowl on her face
he settled for, "Um, gosh," instead.

"Well,
Special,
it's an honor to have you here,"
Mayor Lupus said,
pitching her voice to carry.
"There's rooms inside for all of you
for as long as you need them.
Oh,
and may I introduce Special Leaf?"

The elderly tortoise had somehow made his way to the front of the crowd
without anyone else noticing.
He was wearing a thick, shapeless gray sweater
that Mama Bear had knit for him the winter before last,
and had an old blue scarf wrapped around his neck as well.
He peered at the Regulators through his little round glasses
as if trying to decide whether they were books that needed to be shelved.

Special Blazes dipped his head deferentially.
"It's an honor, Special, truly an honor" he rumbled.
Beside him,
the rabbit doffed her hat and dipped her head as well.

"Thank you,"
Special Leaf said in a slightly fuddled tone.
"If you,
um,
well,
as the mayor said,
if you'd like tea at some point,
you'd be very, um…"
He gestured vaguely in the direction of his house.

Special Blazes dipped his head again.
"Thank you,
but what we'd like most right now is a chance to wash up."

The mulebot made a grinding noise.
The corner of Special Blazes' mouth quirked.
"Or a wipe down and a bit of oil, if there's any to be had,"
he amended.
"And miz mayor,
if you can spare a bit of time for conversation,
we'd be grateful for that as well."

Mayor Lupus waved the three flesh-and-blood Regulators inside
while the mulebot followed Zeke around to the back of the house.
The townspeople dithered and buzzed for a few moments,
then decided in ones and twos that their chores weren't going to do themselves
and headed for home.

"You ever seen a Regulator before?"
Maddy asked Special Leaf.
"I mean, you must have."

The Special nodded.
"Not in some years," he said quietly,
all traces of fuddlement gone from his voice.

"Do you think—"

"Sh."
The old tortoise glanced meaningfully at Sindy and then shook his head.
"There is no point talking of what-ifs and maybes.
Especially not here,"
he added,
nodding slightly toward a small group of people still gossiping nearby.
"But if I may offer some advice?"

He adjusted his glasses.
"Be very, very careful what you say,
especially around Blazes.
He is every bit as smart as the stories say,
but he is not your friend."

</section>
