"What—?" Iffy and Aunt Naggie started
as two Marines stepped into the room.

"Citizen Kwan?"
the first one said,
back straight and voice formal.
"Under Section Twenty Four of the Permanent Emergency Act,
and as authorized by the Governor of Rothera and validated by the city core,
you are hereby ordered to report for induction
into the armed forces of the Commonwealth of Greater Australia
for an indefinite period of service."
De cleared der throat and gestured toward the door behind der.
"If you'll come this way?"

"What!? No! Absolutely not!" Aunt Naggie exploded,
pulling Iffy toward her protectively.
"I know th' law!
She ain't sixteen!
You can't just take her cuz you want to!"

"I'm afraid we can,"
Doctor Johel said calmly.
"And yes,
it is legal,
so please don't make it difficult."

Iffy stared at her,
then at Wales,
who wouldn't meet her eyes,
and then turned to her foster mother.
"Auntie?" she asked,
her voice that of the bewildered little girl she had once been.

Aunt Naggie hugged her.
"I'm not gonna let 'em take you," she whispered fiercely in Iffy's ear.
"I'm not, I'm not, I'm not."

"I think you gotta,"
Iffy whispered back,
squeezing as hard as she could and then letting go.

After a moment Aunt Naggie sagged and nodded,
her cheek scritching against Iffy's shaved head.
Straightening up and wiping her cheek with her sleeve,
she looked Doctor Johel in the eye and said,
"You take care of her.
I'll know if you don't."

"I promise—" Wales started.

"An' you shut yer hole,"
Aunt Naggie said coldly.
"You just shut yer affin', backstabbin' hole."

The hospital smelled nothing like the Marines' headquarters.
The soapy undertone was the same,
but disinfectant and the lingering traces of worry, desperation, and dashed hopes
covered it up.
It was warmer,
though,
and the halls and offices were painted in soothing pastels
instead of bedrock gray.

Iffy barely noticed.
All she could think about as Doctor Johel and the two Marines
led her past people who carefully didn't look her in the eye
how Jeep had changed and how Honesty had seemed like someone else entirely.
Induction was supposed to be temporary,
but—

"Are you all right?" one of the Marines asked
when they finally reached yet another waiting room.

Iffy swallowed back nausea.
"'m fine," she said brusquely.

Doctor Johel gestured at the cot that stood against one wall of the windowless room.
"Get some rest,"
she said.
"Someone will bring you a snack while we get everything set up."
Once again Iffy heard the lock on a door click
with her on the wrong side of it.

She sat in the chair next to the cot instead of lying down
and closed her eyes.
The lock—it was mechanical,
or at least she hoped it was.
Only idiots relied on electronic locks,
and Doctor Johel and the Marines weren't idiots.

"Oh come on," she muttered a moment later.
Why wouldn't it happen when she wanted it to?
Why couldn't she just—

*The lock was a Martree MTR470
manufactured twenty-eight years ago in a restitution labor camp
near Glenavy in South New Zealand.
It was a single-cylinder deadbolt with a double-edged cylindrical key
(dimensions danced neon along the wireframe in her head).
The inset in the cinderblock wall was a basic steel tube—there was
nothing for her there—but the blocking plate was held in place
by three simple back-screws.*

She got up,
stretched,
and ambled over to the door.
Her heart sank.
The three back-screws were held in place by tiny welds.
Whatever tech or bot had installed the lock had thought one step ahead.
She could get it off,
but not without tools and enough banging that someone outside would be sure to overhear.

*«there is a way»*

Her breath caught in her chest.
She hadn't heard a voice.
The thought was just *there*
like a long-lost memory brought to mind by a familiar smell
or an ice cube dropped into a glass of water.
She sniffled and then wiped her nose,
half-expecting to see a streak of blood on her sleeve,
but there was nothing.

*«there is a way / exchange of value / binding agreement»*

The thoughts rising side by side in her head were no more human than jellyfish.
They were a choir,
a jigsaw puzzle,
and a vast subterranean lake untouched by light for millenia,
all at once and all together.

*«limited time interval / urgency of action / exchange of value / binding agreement / confirm»*

For a moment she saw Honesty's smile,
as bright as the Antarctic sun and just as far away,
and nearly panicked.
"Help me," she whispered.

*«binding agreement / confirm»*

She didn't want someone else's accent or someone else's feelings.
She didn't someone else's memories,
even if only for a while.
She was Fifth Ang Kwan.
She didn't know what that meant yet,
but she wanted to find out.

"Yes,"
she said into the emptiness.
"Yes, I agree.
Now get me th' hell outta here."

The alien thoughts vanished as quickly as they had appeared,
leaving behind a sensation like knowing that you'd been told someone's name several times
but not being able to remember it.
Iffy looked at the lock,
willing it to open itself,
but nothing happened.
The lights didn't flicker or go out like they would at a dramatic moment in a sim,
and the corridor outside was as quiet as it had been a moment before.

"Come *on*!"
She kicked the door,
then grabbed the handle and shook it.
Nothing.

She flopped down onto the cot and buried her face in the thin pillow.
She wanted to scream or cry or punch something.
Was this what her olders had felt like
when they'd realized there was nothing they could do to save themselves?
Was this how Aunt Naggie felt,
knowing that Iffy was going to leave one day?
Why did it all have to be so hard?

*Click.*
She swung her legs around and sat up as the door opened.

"Good morning, Citizen, um, Kwan?"
Iñacio the Ecologist was wearing a simple gray tunic and trousers
instead of brown and green,
but his trim little beard was unchanged.
He looked up from the app in his hands
with professional disinterest on his face.
"You are Citizen Kwan, from the *Guinevere*?"
His fingers made the handcode signs for "surveillance",
"help",
and "breakfast"—no,
that couldn't be right,
but it didn't matter.

Iffy cleared her throat.
"Yes.
Um,
yes,
that's me.
What's going on?
What's going to happen to me?"

"Just some tests for now, please,"
Iñacio said,
sounding bureaucratically bored.
"If you'll follow me?"
He stepped aside for her to pass
and gestured down the corridor.

Their footsteps echoed on the tiled floor
as they walked past closed doors,
unoccupied charging alcoves for cleaning bots,
and storage lockers labeled with cryptic acronyms.
Iffy wanted to ask where everyone was,
but the first time she opened her mouth
Iñacio flashed the handsign for "quiet".
She bit back her question,
kept her head down,
and counted steps in her head.

She had just reached one hundred and thirty two
when Iñacio stopped
and pressed his thumb against a silver plate set waist-high on one of the doors.
After a brief hesitation
the door whooshed sideways to reveal an elevator
barely tall enough for Iffy
and a head too short for him.

As the door whooshed closed behind them
he stripped off his tunic
and crouched down to open a box on the floor.
"Here, put this one."
He handed her a transparent face mask and a patched orange windbreaker,
then fit a similar mask over his own face.
His features melted and reformed
to widen his nose and chin
and add a bit of sag to his cheeks.

Iffy pressed her mask to her face.
It was cool against her skin for an instant
like a facecloth that had been sitting in cold water.
"How do I look?" she asked.

He flashed her a smile.
"Just like Nagatha when I first met her.
Here, you'll need this too."
He waited for her to shrug into the windbreaker
before handing her a bracelet
that snapped snug around her wrist.
"If anyone asks,
you came in for induction two days ago but it didn't take.
I'm your uncle
and I'm here to take you home."
He waited for her to nod and then pressed the single button beside the door.

The elevator lurched upward.
One second, two, three—it stopped just as abruptly.
"Go," he muttered.
She slipped out the door and into a dimly-lit room full of sentry bots.

"It's aright."
He put his hand on her shoulder.
"They're all on standby.
Come on."

A moment later they were in a corridor
as busy as the one below had been quiet.
People in navy blue Marine uniforms strode past medical staff in white tunics.
Voices were hushed but urgent:
how many injured still needed to be screened?
How long until the printer finished making new ribs for the patient in room twelve?
And who in the saints' names had told the governor they could double their induction intake?
Did he have any idea how risky that would be?
Or did he just not care?

"Not so loud!"
The woman in white who had made the comment glanced at Iffy and Iñacio
as her companion whispered to her.
The Ecologist put his arm around Iffy's shoulder and hurried her along,
just two more nobodies in the wrong place at the wrong time.

There were Marines at the door,
Marines and sentry bots and a squat three-wheeled medical scanner
that rotated its paddle-liked arms as people walked in and out.
Panic rose in Iffy's throat as they joined the short queue
of staff and visitors and patients.
Their masks wouldn't stand close inspection.
Whatever Iñacio was going to do—

"Any time now," he muttered.

"What?"

"Whatever you're gonna do, do it now."

"I thought *you* were doin' somethin'!"

"Ssh!"
His arm tightened around her shoulders.
"Aright, when I say, you go limp-like, aright?
I'll pick you up an'—whoa!"

They froze as a sentry bot loped forward and halted right in front of them.
Its streamlined gray head pivoted from side to side as it scanned them.
Iffy held her breath as everyone else inched away.

"Is there a problem?"
One of the Marines stepped away from the door.

*«be ready»*
The thought appeared fully-formed in Iffy's head.
She elbowed Iñacio just as all hell broke loose.

The scanner bot raised its paddle arms and spun around,
knocking one of the Marines off der feet.
Another sentry bot lunged at the other Marine,
tangling itself in the legs of her exoskeleton.
As she crashed to the floor,
the lights went out.

"No no no no," someone moaned as red emergency lights came on
and people surged toward the door.

"Halt!
Do not attempt to exit without authorization!"
The Marines were already back on their feet,
the motors their joints revving hard.
One spread her arms wide to block the panicked stampede,
only to be sent staggering as the scanner bot whacked her from behind.

People pressed in on Iffy from all sides.
Someone or something hit her hard between her shoulder blades.
She felt Iñacio stumble—no,
he hadn't stumbled,
he'd broken stride to trip whoever was behind her,
and then they were out the door and on a cobbled side street with a dozen other people,
heads down and walking quickly as drones circled overhead
and told them to stay calm,
this was not an attack,
it was just a temporary malfunction
and they should all resume normal activity immediately.

Two minutes and five corners later
they stopped next to a nondescript utility truck.
Blocky fuel cells lay three deep on its flat bed.
Iñacio unlocked the cab door and reached in
to pull a section of the bench seat forward.
"In through there," he told Iffy.
"The cells'll hide you from scans."

She wriggled through the hole onto the cold metal bed of the truck.
The gap between the stacked fuel cells was no bigger than her bed on the *Guinevere*,
but too low for her to sit up.
As Iñacio put the seat back in place a small blue light came on overhead.
She exhaled gratefully.

The truck's motor whined to life.
It rolled forward smoothly,
bumping over the cobblestones.

"You can take your mask off now,"
Iñacio's voice said overhead.

"Thanks."
Iffy peeled it away from her face
and wiped her eyes.
"How far are we goin'?
And is Aunt Naggie aright?"

"She's fine.
She'll be pleased t' know you are too.
Best settle in, though—we're gonna a bit."
She slid sideways as he rounded a tight corner.
The low hum of tires on asphalt replaced the duh-duh-duh-duh of the cobblestones.
"You want some music?"

"Sure."
She closed her eyes as a woman's voice began to croon something melancholy
in a language she didn't recognize.
