Late Night Thoughts on Listening to Mahler's Ninth Symphony

Lewis Thomas

I cannot listen to Mahler's Ninth Symphony with anything like the old
melancholy mixed with the high pleasure I used to take from this
music. There was a time, not long ago, when what I heard, especially
in the final movement, was an open acknowledgement of death and at the
same time a quiet celebration of the tranquility connected to the
process. I took this music as a metaphor for reassurance, confirming
my own strong hunch that the dying of every living creature, the most
natural of all experiences, has to be a peaceful experience. I rely on
nature. The long passages on all the strings at the end, as close as
music can come to expressing silence itself, I used to hear as
Mahler's idea of leave-taking at its best. But always, I have heard
this music as a solitary, private listener, thinking about death.

Now I hear it differently. I cannot listen to the last movement of the
Mahler Ninth without the door-smashing intrusion of a huge new
thought: death everywhere, the dying of everything, the end of
humanity. The easy sadness expressed with such gentleness and delicacy
by that repeated phrase on faded strings, over and over again, no
longer comes to me as old, familiar news of the cycle of living and
dying. All through the last notes my mind swarms with images of a
world in which the thermonuclear bombs have begun to explode, in New
York and San Francisco, in Moscow and Leningrad, in Paris, in Paris,
in Paris. In Oxford and Cambridge, in Edinburgh. I cannot push away
the thought of a cloud of radioactivity drifting along the Engadin,
from the Moloja Pass to Ftan, killing off the part of the earth I love
more than any other part.

I am old enough by this time to be used to the notion of dying,
saddened by the glimpse when it has occured but only transiently
knocked down, able to regain my feet quickly at the thought of
continuity, any day. I have acquired and held in affection until very
recently another sideline of an idea which serves me well at dark
times: the life of the earth is the same as the life of an organism:
the great round being possesses a mind: the mind contains an infinite
number of thoughts and memories: when I reach my time I may find
myself still hanging around in some sort of midair, one of those small
thoughts, drawn back into the memory of the earth: in that peculiar
sense I will be alive.

Now all that has changed. I cannot think that way anymore. Not while
those things are still in place, aimed everywhere, ready for
launching.

This is a bad enough thing for the people in my generation. We can put
up with it, I suppose, since we must. We are moving along anyway, like
it or not. I can even set aside my private fancy about hanging around,
in midair.

What I cannot imagine, what I cannot put up with, the thought that
keeps grinding its way into my mind, making the Mahler into a hideous
noise close to killing me, is what it would be like to be young. How
do the young stand it? How can they keep their sanity? If I were very
young, sixteen or seventeen years old, I think I would begin, perhaps
very slowly and imperceptibly, to go crazy.

There is a short passage near the very end of the Mahler in which the
almost vanishing violins, all engaged in a sustained backward glance,
are edged aside for a few bars by the cellos. Those lower notes pick
up fragments from the first movement, as though prepared to begin
everything all over again, and then the cellos subside and disappear,
like an exhalation. I used to hear this as a wonderful few seconds of
encouragement: we'll be back, we're still here, keep going, keep
going.

Now, with a pamphlet in front of me on a corner of my desk, published
by the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment, entitled MX
Basing, an analysis of all the alternative strategies for placement
and protection of hundreds of these missiles, each capable of creating
artificial suns to vaporize a hundred Hiroshimas, collectively capable
of destroying the life of any continent, I cannot hear the same
Mahler. Now, those cellos sound in my mind like the opening of all the
hatches and the instant before ignition.

If I were sixteen or seventeen years old, I would not feel the
cracking of my own brain, but I would know for sure that the whole
world was coming unhinged. I can remember with some clarity what it
was like to be sixteen. I had discovered the Brahms symphonies. I knew
that there was something going on in the late Beethoven quartets that
I would have to figure out, and I knew that there was plenty of time
ahead for all the figuing I would ever have to do. I had never heard
of Mahler. I was in no hurry. I was a college sophomore and had
decided that Wallace Stevens and I possessed a comprehensive
understanding of everything needed for a life. The years stretched
away forever ahead, forever. My great-great grandfather had come from
Wales, leaving his signature in the family Bible on the same page that
carried, a century later, my father's signature. It never crossed my
mind to worry about the twenty-first century; it was just there,
given, somewhere in the sure distance.

The man on television, Sunday midday, middle-aged and solid,
nice-looking chap, all the facts at his fingertips, more dependable
looking than most high-school principals, is talking about civilian
defense, his responsibility in Washington. It can make an enormous
diffference, he is saying. Instead of the outright death of eighty
milliom American citizens in twenty minutes, he says, we can, by
careful planning and practice, get that number down to only forty
million, maybe even twenty. The thing to do, he says, is to evacuate
the cities quickly and have everyone get under shelter in the
countryside. That way we can recover, and meanwhile we will have
retaliated, incinerating all of Soviet society, he says. What about
radioactive fallout? he is asked. Well, he says. Anyway, he says, if
the Russians know they can only destroy forty million of us instead of
eighty million, this will deter them. Of course, he adds, they have
the capacity to kill all two hundred and twenty million of us if they
try real hard, but they know we can do the same to them. If the figure
is only forty million this will deter them, not worth the trouble, not
worth the risk. Eighty million would be another matter, we should
guard ourselves against losing that many all at once, he says.

If I were sixteen or seventeen years old and had to listen to that, or
read things like that, I would want to give up listening and
reading. I would begin thinking up new kinds of sounds, different from
any music heard before, and I would be twisting and turning to rid
myself of human language.
