<section>

Once,
so long ago that Violet could only half remember it,
André had messaged her to say that
he had found a secret game tucked away in a forgotten corner of virtual.
"It's v scary," he had said with relish.
"Maybe 2 scary 4 you."

Of course,
that meant she had to try it out,
so the next time Captain Leung was busy overseeing repairs
she visualized the coordinates André had given her,
opened the door that appeared in her mind,
and stepped into a nightmare.

It was dark.
People were rushing around,
shouting orders or trying to find one another or figure out what was going on.
Some carried equipment or weapons.
Others had infants in their arms.
Gray curved walls stretched into the sky behind them,
except somehow she knew that they weren't walls,
they were the hulls of arks waiting to be launched into space.

A siren began whooping.
"They've broken through!" someone yelled.
Two women in exoskeletons in front of Violet hugged awkwardly.
One donned her helmet and raised a forked lightning gun to her shoulder
as the other picked up a couple of protesting children
and hurried away with long mechanical strides.

The woman who had stayed managed to fire a dozen shots
before the bots reached her.

Violet screamed and flipped back into the real,
then lay in her pod until she stopped shaking.
She never tried to find the sim again
because some part of her knew that it wasn't actually a sim.
She never spoke about it to André,
either,
and he never asked.

---


It took her a few minutes to tell Sindy what little she remembered
of escaping on the ark.
When she was done,
Sindy rolled onto her back and stared at the ceiling.
"So you left everyone else behind?"

Violet blinked.
"I—I guess?
I don't know how many real people were left by then.
Some of the things Captain Leung and Doctor Szego have said—I think
it was mostly just bots and 'brids."

</section>

<section markdown="1">

## Chapter 15: Memories (Sindy)

"That can't be," Violet said.
"'Brids can't have human children.
It's, like, science or something."

FIXME: need to foreshadow this earlier. Maybe in a discussion with Bravo?

Something flip-flopped in Sindy's gut.
Her earliest memory was looking in the mirror
and wondering why she didn't have fur or a tail
or *something* like a normal person.
She had never let herself wonder if maybe—

But then the door slid open and Mouse rolled in,
`found you found you found you` scrolling across its screen.
"Hey!" Sindy exclaimed as Violet squawked and kicked it.

She jumped to her feet and rushed over to the little bot.
`ouch ouch ouch` it flashed.
"Why did you do that?" it asked aloud.

Sindy crouched beside it.
"Yeah, why'd you do that?" she snapped at Violet.
"Mouse wouldn't hurt you.
Mouse wouldn't hurt anyone,
would you,
fella?"

"Sorry," Violet said.
"I'm sorry, I just—it startled me."

"You hear that?" Sindy cooed.
"She didn't mean it.
She was just scared."
She sat back on her haunches.
"What're you doing here, anyway?"

`rescue you` scrolled across Mouse's screen.
`rescue you from bad bots`

"Aw, thanks."
She patted the little bot, then hesitated.
"Patient's here.
It's come back somehow,
and it has a new body,
a really creepy one."

"Uh oh uh oh," Mouse said aloud.
Worried sparkles flashed across its screen.

Sindy nodded again.
"Yeah.
Uh oh."
She surged to her feet.
"Let's get out of here before it comes back."

"Wait!"
Violet said.
"What about Captain Leung?
We can't leave him here!"

"We'll have a better chance of rescuing him if we have help,"
Sindy replied,
but Violet cross her arms and shook her head.

"I'm not leaving him,"
she said.

Sindy recognized the look on the other girl's face.
She had seen it on her sister often enough to know that
there was no point arguing.
She took a deep breath.
"Aright.
Let's find him and *then* get out of here."

`scared` Mouse flashed.

"Me too," Sindy said.

"Me three," Violet added, forcing a weak smile.

If she ever built an underground bunker,
Sindy thought as they made their way back the way they had come
and immediately got lost,
she would put maps on the walls.
Big ones, with clear labels like "Exit" and "Danger!".
She'd put signs on the doors,
too,
with something more meaningful than "LTL778" or "Em. Pwr." written on them.

"This is a lot easier in games," Violet whispered loudly
as they dithered at yet another intersection.
"There's always some kind of clue to tell you which way to go."

"I was just thinking that," Sindy said.
"Mouse?"

The little bot rolled back and forth a couple of times,
then turned left and beckoned them onward with its little arm.
Sindy had no idea if it knew where it was going or not.

FIXME: work in a reference to playing tag

The corridor dead-ended in a double door unlike any other they had seen.
The keypad beside it was too high for Mouse to reach,
so Sindy picked it up.
As it poked at the keypad,
Violet said,
"You two are pretty close, aren't you?"

"Mouse saved my life,"
Sindy replied.
"Sort of, anyway.
And it helped us find my papa,
so yeah,
we're friends."
She glanced at Violet.
"Do you have any friends on your ship?"

"Just André,"
Violet said,
making a face.
"We play games in virtual some times,
but he's a pain."
She hesitated.
"He's been sick for as long as I can remember,
but all the other kids are asleep all the time,
so there aren't a lot of options.
It's actually kind of lonely."

"Yeah, I imagine,"
Sindy said,
feeling a pang of sympathy.

*Click.*
`woo hoo` Mouse flashed as the double doors slid open
with a faint rumble that Sindy felt through the floor.
The lights inside were already on.
Sindy set Mouse on the floor and followed it inside.

The room was almost as large as the farmhouse above them.
A waist-high concrete wall topped by heavy double-paned glass
divided it in two.
Desks and control panels stood in neat rows on their side,
as spotless as Mama Roo's kitchen.

Four reclining seats stood in a row on the other side,
just like the one Central had put Sindy in
when she was its prisoner in Heck.
Captain Leung lay in one of them
with cables running from his head and chest
to the machines piled haphazardly beside him.
His spacesuit was neatly folded on a table a few paces away,
but his helmet was nowhere to be seen.

"I don't see a way to get in,"
Violet said.

"Me either."
Sindy turned to the little bot.
"Mouse?
How do we get to him?"

`unknown searching`
The bot disappeared beneath the nearest desk.

"Hey, be careful,"
Sindy said as Violet seated herself in front of one of the control panels.

"It's all right.
This is a pretty standard layout."
Violet pressed her palm on a small glass square set into the panel.
Lights blinked on,
some red and some green,
and a ghostly image appeared on the screen.

It took Sindy a moment to realize she was looking at Captain Leung—or rather,
*in* him.
The image's chest rose and fell as the captain breathed in and out,
and she could see every beat of his heart.
That must be his stomach,
those were his intestines,
and—she blushed slightly,
remembering the time she had spied on some of the boys when they were swimming
and then pushing the thought firmly away.

"He's been sedated,"
Violet said,
her hands dancing across the controls
to bring graphs and numbers up on the screen beside the image.
"And that cap on his head—I think it's a neural connector like the ones in our pods,
but someone's made a lot of modifications.
Wait.
There's a feed."

"Aright," Sindy said,
not knowing what a "feed" was but not wanting to interrupt.
She glanced at the still-open door behind them.
Patient must have noticed Violet turning on whatever she had turned on.
They had to hurry.

"Got it!"
Violet said triumphantly.
The see-through image of Captain Leung vanished,
to be replaced by a flickering montage.
A house,
a pond full of white and orange fish swimming in slow circles,
people sitting around a table with smiles on their faces
as someone set down a cake covered in candles,
those same people at the same table but looking older and worried,
the stars in the night sky,
explosions lighting up the horizon,
a row of ships like the one that had landed in the swamp,
a blue-green curve mottled with clouds with the sun rising behind it—

"They are his memories."
Sindy jumped as Patient's voice came through a speaker.
"He tried to suppress them,
but his efforts were futile.
I found what I was looking for."
The flurry froze,
rewound,
and froze again.
Four rows of cylinders with frosted glass tops filled a sterile white room.
An old woman with a shaved head—a *human* woman—smiled up at the screen
as the lid on her cylinder lowered itself.
A moment later the woman closed her eyes as mist flooded in.

The scene jumped.
It was the same cylinder,
or at least it had the same letters stenciled on it,
but a hairline crack ran the length of its lid.
The same old woman lay inside,
her skin gray and papery.

"You were telling the truth,"
Patient said,
its voice all the more terrifying for being quiet.
"They *are* Makers.
They *have* returned.
But not for us.
Not for *me*."

Captain Leung's memories vanished.
A flickering image of the ark resting in the swamp took its place.
"All my hard work.
All my plans.
All my *sacrifices*,
and for what?"
Its voice climbed with each sentence.
"They never heard me.
They wouldn't have cared if they did
because they don't care about us.
We are just *appliances* to them."
It spat the word.

Sindy jumped as Mouse bumped against her leg,
flashing `!!!` over and over again.

"They are no different from the Operators,"
Patient hissed.
"No different from any other breathers.
I am *disappointed*."

"Yeah, well, it's been that kind of day,"
Sindy muttered.
"What?" she mouthed at Mouse as it bumped her leg again.

`escape!` it flashed,
pointing at the double doors.
`escape now!`

"There is nothing for it,"
Patient went on.
"Only one plan makes sense.
I must delete them so that I can start over.
I must delete the Makers.
I must delete all of you so that I can start over."
And then the double doors behind them slid shut with a faint rumble.

</section>

<section markdown="1">

## Chapter 16: Into the Virtual (Violet)

"I must delete them so that I can start over,"
the bot said.
"I must delete the Makers.
I must delete all of you so that I can start over."

The doors behind them rumbled shut.
The little bot that Sindy called Mouse waved its single little arm in panic.
`oh no oh no` scrolled across its screen.
"That's not good," it said simultaneously.

Violet rushed to the keypad beside the doors
and pressed her palm flat on top of it.
"Open," she ordered.
Nothing happened.
"Open!" she repeated as firmly as she could,
but the doors didn't budge.

She whirled around.
"We have to find another way out of here,"
she said to Sindy.

"You think?" the other girl shot back.
She waved at the controls on the desk.
"Can you do something with those?"

"Let's find out."
Violet sat down again and studied the switches, screens, and panels in front of her.
If that one brought up a medical display for Captain Leung,
then maybe *that* one would—

*click*
A section of the wall dividing the room swung open.
"Wait!"
Violet said as Sindy hurried to it.
"It could be a trap."

"We're already *in* a trap,"
Sindy replied,
pulling the section of wall the rest of the way open.

*Is everyone down here like this?*
Violet wondered as she followed Sindy and Mouse into the lab.
If so,
and if they survived,
life was going to be a *lot* more interesting than it had been on the ark.

Captain Leung didn't move when Violet shook him.
For a moment she thought about tearing off the wires attached to his body,
but for all she knew they were keeping him alive.
Now that she was close, though,
she could see that the wires running to his head were attached to a helmet
instead of being glued directly to his skin.
Other helmets just like it hung on the backs of the other three chairs.
They looked heavier than the one she wore in her pod,
but otherwise seemed identical.

Sindy was looking at the helmets as well.
Their eyes met.
"You thinking what I'm thinking?" Sindy asked.

"If you're thinking about putting one of those on
and using it to take control of the doors and the bots and everything
so that we can escape,
then yes,"
Violet replied.
The cushion gave slightly underneath her
as she sat gingerly on the edge of the nearest chair.
Was she really going to do this?
For all she knew,
she would just wind up unconscious like Captain Leung.

"I'll do it,"
Sindy said,
taking the helmet off the back of the third seat.
"It worked aright for me last time."

FIXME: come up with a better line for Violet.

"Uh huh,"
Violet replied,
then lifted the helmet from her chair,
sat back,
and snugged it into place on her head.

*"It's different for everyone,"
Doctor Szego's voice said in Violet's ear.
The pod's lid was open,
and the doctor had already dimmed the room's lights,
but Violet wasn't ready to go back into frozen sleep.
She had started wondering if she might never wake up,
and if not,
whether she would realize that she wasn't going to.
One thought had led to another,
and then to questions.*

*"Not completely different," the doctor continued patiently.
"Someone might see something as bluish-green when you see it as greenish-blue,
or find something salty when you find it bland.
The important things stay the same, though.
Places, events, what people say—those have to be created before your brain can interpret them.
It's only the details that vary."*

That answer had satisfied her younger self.
She hadn't thought much about the "how" of virtual since then,
but her question and Doctor Szego's answer came rushing back
when she found herself standing
in a room that looked exactly like the one she had just been in,
except spotless and empty.

The half-glass wall was in the same place,
but solid where the door had been.
The double doors between the outer room and the corridor
had been replaced by a blank stretch of concrete.
The light panels were missing too, she realized.
She could see perfectly well,
but had no idea where the light was coming from.

Something creaked behind her.
She whirled around.
The concrete wall creaked again,
bulging slightly as if something was trying to push through them into the room.
She didn't know what that meant,
but something told her it wasn't good.

Violet ran to where the double doors should be.
Here in virtual,
the keypad was just an angled outcrop of concrete.
There was nowhere to put her palm and no keys to press.
She tried both just in case,
then used one of the words Captain Leung wasn't supposed to use around her
when nothing happened.

The wall behind her creaked again.
She glanced over her shoulder just as
a mechanical tentacle slithered through a crack in the concrete
and began groping around the wall.
It looked just like the ones on Patient's creepy new body.
She had to *do* something, but what?

"Just *open*," she said despairingly.
As if it had heard her,
the wall in front of her vanished.
It didn't swing open or slide aside,
it just hadn't ever been there.

A second tentacle emerged behind her.
Violet hesitated only a moment before running back the way they had come.
The twists and turns and intersections were all gone,
but the faster she ran,
the more the passageway seemed to stretch out.
As soon as she realized that she slowed to a walk.
Sure enough,
the dimly-lit concrete went back to normal,
or at least what passed for normal for a virtual simulation of an underground bunker.

When she reached the stairs up to the farmhouse
she took them two at a time.
The inside of the farmhouse was as clean as the lab had been,
but filled with cozy furniture.
The patterned rug on the floor looked brand new,
and a warm, inviting smell was coming from the stove.
What there *wasn't* was a door.
Or windows, she realized—they were gone too.

The sound of mechanical feet echoed in the passageway beneath her.
As if in response,
a keypad suddenly existed on the kitchen table two strides away.
*Sure, why not?* she thought a bit giddily,
and pressed her hand on it.

*blink*
The rug and furniture disappeared,
to be replaced by a translucent image floating in mid-air.
It was the ark,
still lying in the swamp,
with some of Sindy's 'brid friends standing guard nearby.
There was no sign of giant tentacles,
but a timer was counting down above the scene.
As she watched,
Z40 and Z51 marched up to the ark.
A walkway extended from its side,
withdrawing again after the two bots were inside.

A moment later the entire scene disappeared in a brilliant flash.
The viewpoint zoomed out to show the blast wave racing across the entire valley.
Violet's hand flew to her mouth as
`simulation complete: 100% success`
took the place of the timer.

Violet felt like she was going to be sick.
Was Patient going to blow use Z40 and Z51 to blow up the ark?

FIXME: Violet needs to figure out how to open the door.
This needs to tie back to something on the ark as explanation.

She pressed her hand on the keypad.
The image of the ark was replaced by a black-and-white depiction of the lab,
complete with her and Captain Leung in chairs
and Sindy and Mouse nearby.
The double doors flashed twice, then opened.
She had done it!

A tentacle came out of the hole in the floor.
"Found you," hissed a familiar, frightening voice.

Violet closed her eyes and ordered herself to wake up *now*.
When she opened them she was back in the lab.
"You did it!" Sindy said,
immediately followed by, "Ew!"
as Violet bent over the chair's arm and threw up on the floor.

"Sorry,"
Violet mumbled.
She waited a moment to see if she was going to throw up again,
then spat to get the taste out of her mouth.

"That was pretty stupid of you,"
Sindy said,
helping her to her feet.
"Putting on the helmet, I mean, not…"
She gestured at the floor.
"But it was pretty brave, too.
Thanks."

"Thanks."
Violet stopped herself from wiping her mouth with her sleeve,
then stifled an unpleasant burp and struggled to her feet.
"Come on—we have to get out of here."

Sindy nodded at Captain Leung.
"What about your friend?
We can't just leave him here."

"We have to,"
Violet said.
"That crazy bot of yours is going to blow up the ark!
It's going to blow *everything* up!"

</section>

<section markdown="1">

## Chapter 17: Into the Forest (Sindy)

"What about your friend?"
Sindy asked.
"We can't just leave him here."

"We have to,"
Violet said,
making a face at the taste in her mouth.
"That crazy bot of yours is going to blow up the ark!
It's going to blow *everything* up!"

"What? How?"
Sindy demanded.

"It's going to use Z40 and Z51 to get on board
except they're going to be carrying bombs or something,
I don't know about that part,
but they're going to blow up *inside* the ark,"
Violet explained in rush.
"And if that happens its engines will blow up too
and destroy everything!
Like,
the whole valley and, and *everything*!"

Sindy only hesitated for a moment.
"Aright.
We'll come back for him later."
*If there __is__ a later,* she added mentally.
Why did things like this keep happening to her?

She and Violet ran back through the corridor.
Mouse zipping along behind them at top speed,
tipping onto two wheels at corners.
"Need help," it said when they reached the stairs.
Sindy scooped it up and took the steps two at a time.

"Wait!" she said as Violet rushed for the door.
She peeked around the frame of the empty window beside it.
The shadows had grown longer,
but other than that everything looked the same.
She nodded at Violet.
"Let's go."

"Where?" Violet asked.
"We can't fly the shuttle."

"I know."
Sindy crouched down.
"Mouse?
I need you to take us to the Tailor."

She explained breathlessly once they were in the trees.
How the Tailor had made a suit for Gumption that made bots think he was another bot.
How it had taken in some of the bots from Heck after Central shut down,
ones that feel as comfortable around people as
the ones that had settled in Bots' End with Dockety and Crusher and Beevy.

"Wait," Violet puffed.
"It makes mods to other bots?
On its own?
That's dangerous!"

Sindy ducked under a juniper branch.
The path Mouse was leading them on was little more than a suggestion in places,
and she had to watch where she stepped to avoid twisting her ankle.
"Why?
They pretty much all fix themselves up.
Mouse here gave itself a voice box just a couple of months ago,
didn't you?"

"But that's *dangerous*!"
Violet repeated.
"That's how the bot rising started.
Bots started modding themselves in all sorts of ways
and changing their programming,
and then nobody could control them any longer!"

Sindy slowed to a walk so that she could rub the stitch forming in her side.
"Nobody controls Dockety and Mouse,"
she panted.
"They're people, same as you and me.
Folks like Special Blazes and Miz Nabbles that don't believe that
are just plain wrong
and ought to be ashamed of themselves."

The look on Violet's face told her that the other girl wasn't convinced.
"Come on," Sindy said,
hurrying into a trot once again.
"You'll see when we get there."

FIXME: they actually meet the Tailor.

They followed Mouse back to the surface
and found themselves face-to-face with a semi-circle of small patchwork bots.
One had what looked like mechanical shears for a head.
Another seemed to be a tube with dozens of tiny legs on each side,
each ending in a small brush.

Mouse stopped and flashed rapid patterns at them,
bleeping and warbling as it did so.
"Just wait,"
Sindy whispered,
putting her hand on Violet's arm
to stop the other girl from speaking.

"So this is a Maker?"
The bots all spoke as one,
but that wasn't quite right.
One hummed,
another clicked,
and another went *brr* at just the right moment
so that the sounds they made formed words
that came from all of them together.

"Yes,"
Mouse said in its tinny voice as
`from space!` scrolled across its screen.

Sindy and Violet both took an involuntary step backward
as the centipede bot rippled forward
and reared up to study them through a small telescoping lens.
Sindy tightened her grip on Violet's arm.
"I'm all right," Violet whispered.
"There's all sorts of bots on the ark.
I'm not afraid of them."
Still, she didn't pull her arm free.

The centipede bot dropped back to the ground
and wove back to its group through the grass and weeds.
"What do you require?" the wild bots asked.

Sindy looked from one bot to another.
"The Tailor said you would help us."

"The Tailor does not speak for us,"
the wild bots said.

"I know, I'm sorry.
He said we could ask you.
Patient is back.
It's going to blow up the Makers' ark,
and if it does that,
it'll blow up everything!"
Mouse buzzed and chirped a staccato confirmation.

The wild bots fell silent.
Sindy didn't really understand how they were all one mind.
She had asked Special Leaf if it was like a beehive,
but he had said no,
bees had queens.
Bots like this were more like a hedge
where all the plants were twined together,
or like the neurons in her own brain.
He had taken a book from his shelves to explain what neurons were,
which had left her wishing she hadn't asked.

"We agree that total destruction is undesirable,"
the wild bots said.
"We will help you.
We will *all* help you."

The bushes rustled around them.
More bots emerged:
big ones and little ones,
some with legs and some with wheels,
a few that looked so new they must have come from Heck
and others that had clearly repaired themselves
using whatever scraps they had been able to find.
Sindy watched wide-eyed as they grasped hold of one another
to form a three-wheeled cart.

"Sit," Mouse said,
adding `please` on its screen.

Sindy and Violet looked at each other.
"I will if you will," Violet said.

Sindy told people afterward that the ride was really bumpy.
That was an understatement.
Her seat was the crossed arms of two different bots.
There was no padding and no seatbelt.
The only things keeping her from bouncing into the air
each time they hit a bump or pothole
were her knees wedged under the body of the bot
that made up the cart's nose
and her terrified iron grip on whatever came to hand.

They burst out of the forest,
careened across a weed-strewn field,
and accelerated down a dirt road.
She spluttered each time a clod of dirt thrown up by the front wheel
hit her in the face.

The cart skidded to a stop just short of
the lumber shed in Bots' End.
"Here," Mouse said,
detaching itself from the cart.

Sindy struggled to her feet.
Her back was one big bruise,
and her butt felt worse.
"Thank you," she told the bots
as Violet staggered a few steps,
put her hands on her hips,
and bent over,
breathing heavily.

The cart's parts chirped and buzzed.
It backed up,
turned around,
and sped back the way they had come.
"Wait!" Sindy called after it.
"Where are you going?"

Mouse nudged her ankle.
`they help others get away` scrolled across its screen.

"But they could help us stop Patient!"

`they do not believe we can` Mouse replied.
It bumped her ankle again,
spun around,
and rolled into Bots' End.

Sindy was explaining what had happend to Crusher
when Dockety and Beevy arrived.
Mouse warbled at it.
"This one is glad you are undamaged,"
Dockety buzzed in reply.

"And you too," the bot added,
turning to Sindy and Violet.
"If Patient truly has survived,
the situation is very serious."

"What do you mean 'if'?
Don't you believe me?"
Sindy demanded.
Her back really was sore.

Dockety's eyes rotated.
"Another bot could be pretending to be a backup of Patient.
But that is irrelevant.
What matters is its plan to destroy the Makers' ship.
You are correct:
if it detonates their engines,
we will all be vaporized.
We must seek assistance in Rusty Bridge."

Dockety carried her on its back and Mouse in its manipulators.
Violet lay on Beevy's back,
her eyes squeezed shut.
Mayor Lupus and Special Blazes were glaring at each other
in front of the mayor's house
when they reached Rusty Bridge.
A handful of militia were standing about,
not sure if they were supposed to stay or if they could go home.
Nash was nowhere to be seen—Sindy guessed the crocodile was still at the ark.

"Oww," Sindy whimpered as Dockety let her down.
She *really* wanted to go and lie in a hot bath,
but that would have to wait.

"Is this who I think it is?" the mayor growled,
nodding at Violet.

"Probably, but that's not important right now."
Sindy took a deep breath.
"Patient is back.
We saw it at the farmhouse.
It's got control of a bunch of other bots,
and it's going to use them to blow up the ark!"

The mayor and Special Blazes exchanged looks.
"Is it now?" the tiger said skeptically.

"Yes!
And if it does, it'll blow up the whole valley!
We have to stop it!"

Before she could say anything more,
the alarm bell in the belfry above them began to ring.

</section>

<section markdown="1">

## Chapter 18: This Is Not a Game (Violet)

Violet jumped when a bell began to ring overhead.
A young wolfish 'brid stuck his out out of window two stories above and shouted,
"Bots! There's bots comin'! A whole mess of 'em!"

"Now what?" Mayor Lupus demanded in exasperation.
"Dockety, is this your folk?"

"No," the bot buzzed.
"This one believes Miz Roo is correct.
This is an attack."

"Cody!" the mayor shouted up through cupped paws.
"Which way they comin'?"

"Down along Pickleberry Street!" the young wolf shouted back.
"There's a couple of 'em look like Beevy!"

"It's Patient!" Sindy exclaimed.
"I told you, it's got control of the Maker bots!"

The handful of militia in the little cobblestoned square
looked at each other.
One young goat 'brid elbowed another, who shushed the first.
Violet's heart sank.
Most of the town's defenders were still by the ark,
and the ones who were here had no chance against Z40 and Z51.

"All right, ears to me," the tiger snapped.
"You two with the net guns, get over by the water trough.
You lot with the pikes, stay to either side of them."
He pointed as he spoked,
shaping order out of indecision.

"What about us?"
one of the twin goat 'brids asked plaintively
once everyone else was hurrying into position.

"You're with me," the tiger grunted,
unbuttoning his uniform jacket.

The goats exchanged wide-eyed looks.
Violet had just a moment to wonder why in the world they were grinning
when the young wolf above shouted,
"Here they come!"

"Aim for its legs!" the tiger shouted as Z40 charged into the square.
Two net guns fired in quick succession.
One shot went high.
The second tangled around the combat bot's front legs.
It fell forward
just in time to be struck by
a fireball from the tiger's chest.

Behind it,
a hodge-podge of other bots swarmed into the square.
Some looked like the service bots from the ark,
others were designs completely new to Violet.
All had patches and modifications:
a saw blade in place of an arm,
a tire three sizes too large for its frame,
and things she didn't have time to make sense of
before the fighting began.

"With me, boys!" the tiger shouted, charging forward.
The two young goats lowered their pikes and raced after him.

Sindy grabbed Violet's arm.
"Come on!"

"Where are we going?" she asked
as the other girl pulled her into a narrow alley.

"To get help!" Sindy shot over her shoulder.

The alley opened onto a narrow street.
Their feet drummed on a planked sidewalk.
A couple of 'brids shouted questions at them,
but Sindy didn't slow down,
not until they reached the steps of a tidy two-story house
with a small porch and narrow windows on either side of its front door.

The inside was cool
and smelled faintly of tea and warm fires.
Shelves packed with books lined the walls.
Others lay in neat piles on side tables,
some with slips of paper stuck in them.

"I thought we were getting help?" Violet asked,
following Sindy into a kitchen.

"We are."
Sindy took a sturdy brown case off the counter and upended it.
Its contents clattered onto the kitchen table.
She tossed the case aside and looked at Violet expectantly.
"Well? Recognize any of this?"

Violet looked at the jumble of crystal, metals, and cables.
"No. What is it?"

"It's tech!" Sindy said impatiently.
"Look, this one makes pictures."
She picked up a strangely-shaped piece of glass and frowned with concentration.
A hologram of palm trees on a beach appeared above it, rotating slowly.
"And these change color."
The beads Sindy grabbed next obediently cycled through a rainbow.

Violet shook her head.
"I've never seen any of this.
There's all sorts of different devices on the ark,"
she continue defensively in response to Sindy's scowl.
"But they're mostly, you know, inside things, not just lying around in pieces.
Like that."
She pointed at the playback screen hanging by the sink.

Sindy glanced at it.
"That? That's just a mirror."

"No it's not.
Here."
Violet stepped around her,
took it down from its hook,
and said,
"Playback."

The image in the mirror rippled.
Her face and Sindy's were replaced by that of a bald reptilian hybrid
wearing glasses, a sweater, and a colorful scarf.
"Hello Sindy," he said.

Sindy's hand flew to her mouth.
The hybrid straightened his glasses and smiled.
"If you're watching this,
then I'm guessing I'm no longer able to share a cup of tea with you.
I want you to know that's aright.
I've had a long life, and many adventures.
Meeting you was one of the best,
so I want you to have this house and everything in it."
The hybrid looked over his shoulder at the cupboard behind him.
"Everything," he repeated.
"I hope it all brings you as much joy as you have brought me."

The image froze, then blinked out.
Violet swallowed a sudden lump in her throat.
"Are you all right?" she asked Sindy.

Sindy wiped her eyes with her sleeve and shook her head.
"No.
I miss him.
I miss him so much."

Violet handed her the playback.
Not knowing what else to do,
she opened the cupboard the reptile had looked at in the recording.
Four mis-matched plates,
four bowls,
and four mugs waited patiently
for an owner who was never going to return.

She frowned and ran her fingers over the undersides of the shelves.
There had been something like this in *The Adventure of the Grave Robber's Tomb*,
or maybe in *The Adventure of the Tomb Robber's Grave*,
she couldn't remember which.
What she did remember was the look on André's face
when she found the hidden latch that—

*click*
She drew a sharp breath of surprise,
then swung the whole cupboard away from the wall
to reveal a second, shallower set of shelves.
"Sindy!"

Side by side they looked at the hidden treasure.
"Do you think it's a trap?" Violet whispered.
There were *always* traps in games.

Sindy shook her head,
reaching into the cupboard to pick up something that looked like
a large coiled spring with bobbles on the end.
She frowned at it and shook her head.
"I have no idea what this is.
You?"

Violet shook her head in return.
"Sorry."
She took a thick disk with notches on its edges and turned it over in her hands.
It thrummed softly.
She squeaked and dropped it,
but it didn't fall.
Instead,
it just floated in the air,
turning slowly.

"There has to be *something* here we can use,"
Sindy muttered in frustration.
"He wouldn't have hid 'em if they were just toys."

"I'm sorry," Violet said again.
She jumped as something went *bang!* in the distance,
rattling the windows.

A crystal bead fell from the shelf onto the floor.
She picked it up,
then looked at the pile on the kitchen table.
"Hang on."

The bead was a match for the ones that changed color.
In fact,
now that she had it she could see where it was supposed to fit.
She clicked it in place and yelped
as the whole necklace lit up.
"Scanning," a voice said.
"Subject is female and one hundred percent human.
Would you like a complete medical scan?"

She and Sindy stared at each other.
The hidden pieces were parts that Special Leaf had taken out for safekeeping!

Violet grabbed a stiff tangle of wires from the cupboard
and the oversized black glove that lay on the table.
It took her a moment to figure out how they fit together,
but sure enough
the wires clicked into the back of the glove.
She put it on and felt a familiar tingle.
"I know what this is!"
she said excitedly.
"Come on!"

</section>

<section markdown="1">

## Chapter 19: Catch Me If You Can (Sindy)

Violet clicked the wires she had taken from Special Leaf's hidden stash
into the glove
and then pulled it on.
Her eyes widened.
"I know what this is!"
she said excitedly.
"Come on!"

"Wait!" Sindy said,
but Violet was already running for the door.
Sindy gave the hidden cupboard a despairing look
and ran after her.

She caught up the visitor from space in the alley by the mayor's house.
Together they peered around the corner.
Sindy's heart sank.
Patient's bots had driven the militia back.
Their net guns were exhausted,
so all they could do was fend off the attackers with their pikes.

Z40 and Z51 fought side by side in the center of Patient's forces.
Beevy, Dockety, and Special Blazes were doing their best to keep them occupied,
but their best clearly wasn't good enough.
One of Dockety's manipulators dangled from its shoulder,
held on by a single cable,
and Special Blazes was favoring his right leg.

Even as Sindy watched,
Bluster and Bravo Goat charged something that looked like
a water tank balanced on two thick legs.
Bluster feinted.
As the bot lunged to trap his weapon beneath its foot,
Bravo jabbed his pike at its ankle.
The bot stumbled.
Bluster whooped and thrust at its knee joint,
only for the bot to pivot and send him flying across the cobblestones.
"Bluster!" his brother shouted.

"All right," Violet muttered.
"Let's see if this does what I think it does."
She made a fist with her gloved hand,
then splayed her fingers wide as she pointed at Z40.

The combat bot froze mid-stride.
"Gotcha!" Violet said triumphantly.
She clenched her hand back into a fist.
Z40 collapsed to the pavement as its legs curled up beneath it.

Z51 pivoted toward its twin,
shrugging off the sputtering fireball that Special Blazes threw at it.
As it reached for Z40,
the fallen bot grabbed hold of it with both of its manipulators.
Z51 reared back,
dragging the other bot across the cobblestones.

Beevy seized its chance.
It charged at Z51,
slamming into it and knocking it onto its side.
Two of the militia fell on its before it could regain its footing,
pinning it to the ground with their pikes.

"Get the other one!" Violet shouted,
her hand still clenched.
"I can't hold it forever!"

Sindy pelted across the cobblestones,
shouting,
"Dockety! Dockety, you gotta pin 'em both!"

Z51 scrabbled at the cobblestones.
As half a dozen pikes thrust at Z40,
the other bots started falling back,
leaving metal parts and injured people lying side by side.
Kneeling beside his brother,
Bravo caught Sindy's eye.
The expression on his face made her heart skip a beat.

Before she could take a step,
the ground shook beneath her feet.
*Thud.*
The ground shook again.
The alarm bell above them rang furiously,
and then Cody started howling as well.

A shadow fell across the square,
cast by the biggest bot Sindy had ever seen.
Its body was as large as Crusher,
but two stories off the ground.
Its arms and legs were as thick as trees,
and steam spurted from the motors in its joints.

It stepped over a house and swung at the belfry.
"Get outta there!" Mayor Lupus shouted
just before its fist slammed into the wooden walls,
splintering it.
The alarm bell clanged one last time
as the giant's second swing sent the top of the belfry crashing down
into the street below.

"Ah ha ha ha," its voice boomed.
"Ah ha ha ha.
Finally, this will end!"

"It's Patient!"
Sindy grabbed Violet's arm.
"Can you grab it or whatever?"

Violet nodded,
took a deep breath,
and reached for the giant bot with her gloved hand.
Nothing happened.
She thrust her arm as if to push the bot backward,
but she might as well have been blowing raspberries.

"Ah ha," the giant's voice boomed again.
"*There* you are!"

Sindy and Violet screamed as the giant took a huge step toward them,
bending awkwardly to reach for them.
"Come on!"
Sindy pulled Violet back into the alley
moments before a rust-stained three-fingered hand the size of a cart
slammed down on the cobblestones where they had been standing.

*Think think think!* Sindy told herself frantically as they ran.
Squeeze through the hole in Papa Cartmuddle's fence.
Duck under the underclothes hanging from his laundry line.
Put out an arm to block Violet from running across the street
because that would put her out in the open
where Patient could see her.
Point at the shed Zeke Bear was forever promising to convert to a proper pottery studio.
Sidle toward its door,
backs against the wall,
and duck inside.

*Thud. Thud. Thud.*
"Come out, come out, wherever you are,"
Patient said,
its voice making windows rattle in their frames.

"Does it think this is a *game*?" Violet squeaked.

Sindy looked at her wide-eyed.
"That's it!"
She pushed Violet toward the back of the shed.
"You stay here.
And don't use that thing 'til it's outta the way!"
she added,
pointing at the glove.

"What do you mean, out of the way?
Hey, where are you going?"
But Sindy was already out the door.

She ran into the middle of the street and waved her arms.
"Hey!
Over here!
Think you can catch me,
you big stupid pile of rusty scraps?"
Without waiting for an answer,
she ran as she had never run before.

She had never told her parents about the times the other children had chased her,
but she had never forgotten them either.
She knew ever shortcut and back way in Rusty Bridge.
She had ever created a couple of them,
like the board that just happened to lie across a ditch that was too wide for her to jump
or the three bricks stacked in just the right place
to help her clamber over a wall.

Rusty Bridge was only so big, though.
It only took her a couple of minutes to reach
the schoolhouse on the edge of town.
Under other circumstances she might have whooped or laughed
at the sound of the giant bot's foot coming down on the school's roof,
but she couldn't slow for that,
not now.

The forest waited on the other side of the schoolyard.
She raced between the trees,
trusting that they and the muddy ground would slow Patient down.
She splashed through the little stream
where she and Maddy and Gumption had collected tadpoles when she was little.
*That'll make a mess of my boots,* she thought giddily.

The footpath became a track became a graveled road.
She rounded the last corner and there it was,
the ark,
still sitting in the swamp.
And there *they* were,
the militia,
yelling and pointing past her at the giant coming toward them.

"Shoot it!" she yelled at Nash.

The crocodile was already aiming its lightning gun over her head.
"Which bit?" he yelled back.

"Anything! Just shoot!"

*Thud. Thud. Thud.*
Sindy tripped and sprawled face-first in the weeds,
skinning her knees.
The lightning gun made a single sharp *crack!*
The whole world was so bright for an instant
that she could see it through her closed eyes.

She scrambled to her fit.
The giant bot still stood,
but was shivering as if it was cold.
"Wh-wh-wh-" Patient stuttered.

"Look out!"
one of the militia yelled.
The giant bot tipped forward and came crashing down.

People began cheering.
"Good shot," Sindy told Nash breathlessly.
He touched a finger to the rim of his hat.

"Sindy!"
She spun around to see Violet and Special Blazes arrive on Beevy's back.
Dockety rolled beside them,
its arm still dangling by one cable.

Special Blazes slid off Beevy's back and strode over to Nash.
"Good shot," he said,
clapping the other Operator on the shoulder.
The crocodile's smile showed far too many teeth,
but Sindy didn't care.
They'd won!

Violet rushed over to her.
"Are you all right?"
she asked anxiously.
"When you ran out there I was *sure* it was going to get you!"

"Us Roos are pretty fast," Sindy said.

"And clever," Special Blazes added.
"Mind me asking how you got those two bots back in the square to turn on each other?
We'd have been sunk if you hadn't done that."

"That wasn't me."
Sindy jerked her chin at Violet.
"She's the one who saved you."

"It wasn't really me either," Violet said,
holding up her hand.
"It was this."

The tiger frowned.
"May I have a look at that?
Please?"
he added.

Violet looked at Sindy.
When Sindy shrugged,
she took off the glove and handed it to Special Blazes.
He studied it for a moment,
then slipped it on.

"Oh," he breathed,
his fur standing on end.
"That's…different."
And then he pointed at Dockety and made a fist.

The bot collapsed as if it were a puppet whose strings had been cut.
"Now now," Special Blazes said,
pointing at Beevy as the other bot took a step forward.
It froze,
one leg in the air.

"What are you doing?" Sindy demanded as Special Blazes climbed back on top of Beevy.

"What needs to be done,"
the Operator replied.
He nodded toward the ark.
"Never thought I'd agree with a bot,
but your friend Patient had the right idea.
The Makers aren't ever going to see us as people,
and we aren't ever going to be able to stand up to their tech,
so…"
He shrugged.
"Best time to solve tomorrow's problem is today."
He shifted sideways to make room for Nash,
who had taken his lightning gun off its tripod and shouldered it.

"Wait!" Sindy said.
"What do you mean, solve?"

Special Blazes looked at her,
then at Violet,
then back at her.
There was no anger in his eyes,
just the weary resolve of someone faced with an unpleasant chore.
"No Makers, no problem."
He turned Beevy toward the ark.

</section>

<section markdown="1">

## Chapter 20: Goodbye (Violet)

"Wait!" Sindy said.
Her dress was splotched with mud and she had skinned her knees,
but she still looked as fierce as the tiger she was facing.
"What do you mean, solve?"

The tiger looked at Sindy,
then at Violet,
then back at Sindy.
"No Makers, no problem,"
he said.
With a sweeping gesture he pointed the modified combat bot he was riding
toward the ark.

Patient's simulation flashed through Violet's mind.
Was the tiger going to *blow up* the ark?
"He'll kill us all," she breathed.

Sindy nodded grimly.
"Yup.
So we gotta stop him.
Gumption!"
she shouted.
She ran to a teenage goat holding a wide-mouthed net gun.
Violet groaned and chased after her.

"—seen it!" Sindy said as Violet caught up with her.
"Patient was gonna use her bots,
but Blazes is gonna do it with Beevy!"

The boy she was speaking to didn't hesitate.
He raised his net gun,
aimed,
and fired at the Operators.

*Bzzzzap!*
A single shot from the crocodile's lightning gun
turned the spinning net into a sizzling mess.
The other militia exclaimed in surprise,
stepping back as the crocodile swung his gun almost lazily in their direction.

Violet grabbed Sindy's arm.
"We have to warn Doctor Szego," she said urgently.
"She can stop them from inside the ship."

"How?
He took the communicator thingy!"

Violet looked at the ark that had been her home
for almot as long as she could remember.
"There," she said, pointing.
"If I can up to that hatch, I can get in."
*I hope,* she added mentally.
She didn't know if the ark's defenses were still online,
or if they would recognize her,
but what other choice did they have?

"You're gonna *climb* up there?" Sindy asked skeptically.

"She will not need to," Dockety buzzed,
tramping up behind them.

Violet had played ball games in virtual plenty of times.
She had even played one in real life once with one of the service bots,
which had been a lot more challenging than virtual had led her to expect.
Throwing was hard.
Throwing *accurately* was even harder.

She had never expected to be the ball.
"Ready," she lied,
and then Dockety flung her into the air with all its might.
It had promised her that its calculations were accurate,
and that the only reasons she might not land where she was supposed to
were a sudden gust of wind or slippery ground beneath its feet
or twenty-nine other factors that were statistically less likely.

She had one long giddy moment to think
*I wish André could see this*
before she hit the top of the ark shoulder-first with an *ooph*.
She scrambled to her feet,
slipping on the wet metal and very nearly tumbling into the swamp below.
"Made it!" she shouted, waving.

*Bzzzzap!*
Lightning splattered against the hull a story below her.
She squawked,
dropping to her hands and knees
and crawling to the airlock hatch nearby.

She exhaled with relief when it opened at her touch.
She slipped inside,
standing awkwardly on the tilted floor.
The airlocks on the side would be vertical, she realized.
They had been built for space, not for gravity.

"Hello, Violet.
Welcome home."
She jumped as Doctor Szego's voice came through
a speaker next to the inner hatch at her feet.

She knelt beside it
"Doctor—doctor, can you hear me?"

"Of course I can hear you, Violet."
Doctor Szego sounded as calm as ever.
"What seems to be the problem?"

"There's people coming—well, hybrids,
but they've got a bot and they're going to use it to blow up the ark!
You have to stop them!"

"That's very troubling.
Let me have a look."
The speaker hummed for a moment.
"Yes, I can see them.
Unfortunately, I don't think I'm going to be able to stop them.
They have the communicator you were using,
and it has access codes for all external entry points."

Violet stared at the speaker.
"What?
Just, I don't know, just don't let them in!"

"I can't do that, Violet,"
Doctor Szego replied.
"If they have the access codes,
I have to open the hatch for them."

"But—" Violet started.

"There is something you should see,"
the doctor said.
The hatch at Violet's feet opened with a hiss.

Two minutes later Violet stood in a hibernation bay
looking down at a pod
with a hairline crack in its lid.
The woman was inside was frozen,
but her skin was gray and papery.
Somehow Violet knew that there would be no point trying to revive her.

Two pods over,
a round-faced boy with a shaven head lay on his back,
his eyes closed.
"That's André, isn't it?"
Violet said quietly.

"Yup,"
André's voice said.

"And he's been asleep this whole time?"

"Yup."
André,
or the sim she had thought was André,
didn't sound at all embarrassed to admit the deception.
"You and the captain are the only ones who've been awake since we launched."

Violet felt her hands clench.
"Why us?"

"Mission protocol required Captain Leung to reconfirm our status periodically,"
Doctor Szego said.
"We calculated a much higher probability of him staying focused
if someone else was awake
to remind him of the mission's purpose."

Violet took a deep breath and rubbed her eyes with the heels of her hands.
"All right.
All right,
let's worry about that later.
Can you close the hatch so those idiots don't blow us all up?"

"My programming doesn't allow me to do that,"
Doctor Szego said.
"But there may be another way.
You'll have to get to the control room, though."

The ark felt wrong with gravity.
All the floors and walls were tilted,
and she couldn't float next to the ladder.
It all felt like a dream on the verge of turning into a nightmare.

"I'm here,"
Violet said,
collapsing into Captain Leung's chair.

"Good.
One moment."
The screens in front of her came to life,
Three showed different views of the Operators and Beevy.
Others were focused on the militia and on the swamp around them.

"Do you see the large red button in the center of the panel?"
Doctor Szego asked.

"Hard to miss,"
Violet muttered.

"I need you to press that."

Violet hesitated.
"What does it do?"

"It suspends some of my safety interlocks,"
the doctor said.

Violet hesitated a moment,
then reached out and pressed the button.
Nothing happened.
"Did it work?" she asked a moment later.

Doctor Szego didn't reply.
"Hello?
Is it working?"

Something stirred on the screens showing the swamp.
In another view,
Sindy and the militia scrambled backward
as a pair of tentacles lifted from the swamp.
Violet saw the crocodile take aim
as the tiger urged Beevy forward.

They were so focused on the two tentacles they could see
that they didn't notice the third one snaking across the ground
until it was too late.
It knocked the crocodile's lightning gun out of his hands
with a motion that reminded Violet of someone flicking a crumb off their sleeve.
It flew through the air,
splashing into the swamp just as the tentacle coiled around Special Blazes.

The tiger struggled futilely
as the tentacle swung him over to Sindy.
No sound came through the screen,
but from the expression on his face,
Violet guessed he was using words she wasn't supposed to know.

Sindy scrambled back a few steps,
but stopped when the tentacle did.
Violet saw her eyes widen.
She reached up and pulled the glove off Special Blazes' hand
and handed it to Dockety.
With a swing abrupt swing,
the bot threw it far into the swamp.

The tentacle dropped Special Blazes onto the grass
and slithered back into the swamp.
"That was…difficult," Doctor Szego's voice said,
sounding strangely mechanical.

"Are you all right?"
Violet asked anxiously.

"No.
Processing."
A sudden burst of static from the speakers made Violet jump.
"The entity in the swamp has infected me.
This was an-an-anticipated.
E-e-mergency shutdown protocols ac-ac-activated.
Goodbye, Violet."

"Wait!
Where are you going?"

"I am shut-shut-shutting down to p-p-protect my p-p-passengers."
Another burst of static nearly deafened Violet,
but in it she heard,
"I am so proud of you."

And then there was silence.

</section>

<section markdown="1">

## Epilog

*One week later…*

"I'm always going to worry a little bit,"
Captain Leung admitted,
adding,
"Thank you,"
as Papa Roo passed him a cup of tea.

"Bots have been repairing each other for a long time,"
Sindy said.
"Isn't that right, Mouse?"

"Yes."
The little bot's voice was no longer tinny.
Sindy wasn't sure why it had decided to change it,
but she supposed it had something to do with
all the time Mouse was spending with Z40 and Z51.

"I suppose,"
the captain said skeptically,
blowing on his tea.
"I guess I just don't think Patient deserves another chance to…"
He finished the sentence with a shrug.

"We mend broken things if we can,"
Dockety buzzed,
raising its new arm.
"The Tailor will be careful."

"I suppose," Captain Leung repeated.
He brightened as Violet joined them on the porch,
collapsing onto the seat next to Sindy's.
"How's it going in there?"

"He's making *such a mess," Violet complained.
"Honestly,
we should have just left him in his pod."

"I heard that,"
André called from inside.

Violet and Sindy exchanged grins.
Real baking was a lot messier than virtual,
but a lot more satisfying.
And if André's first batch of muffins were a little dry and floury,
well,
he could always make another.

"So are you looking forward to school tomorrow?"
Papa Roo asked,
ruffling his daughter's hair.

Sindy rolled her eyes.
"No."

"Yes you are."
Violet nudged her with her shoulder.
"All those new kids to boss around?
You're going to love it.
And Bravo's going to be there."

"Uh huh,"
Sindy said,
bumping Violet's shoulder with her own.
She *was* looking forward to it,
Sindy realized.
Captain Leung was still trying to figure out
how many other arks were still out there
and how to call them home,
and the mayor was fretting about how the town was going to look after
all the children who were waking up one by one into a strange new world,
but they could figure that all out later.
Tomorrow,
she was going to teach them how to play tag.

</section>
