-   The point of the story is that things _do_ get better once wealth isn't concentrated
    -   But not all at once, and not everyone realizes it
-   Backgrounders
    -   People thought it was coincidence the first couple of times.
    -   Then the conspiracy theorists had their best year ever.
    -   Then it all kind of died down. People can get used to anything.
    -   The oil company executive who burned a billion dollars on principle instead of giving it away.
    	-   Treasury agents showed up to stop it and there was a gunfight.
    -   Then that cardinal, what was his name?
    -   And half the top brass in China in the first year.
-   Client is a rock star with an unexpected hit
    -   Nowhere near the danger zone, but their agent thinks it's a good publicity move
    -   And a chance to milk the client
    -   Steel-toothed grin: "just keepin' him safe" she says
-   "Schurmann still tells people they can transfer it to their kids or their friends."
    -   Sarcastic snort: "Our models show it still counts for twenty-five to a hundred percent of face value."
    -   "Depending on how [don't say obedient] closely aligned the recipient is with the original holder."
    -   "Safest thing is still a donation, and we have a series of expedited donations set up."
    -   "But I can get it all back, right?"
    -   [sigh inwardly - some people don't even read the first page of the briefing packet]
    -   "No - you really have to give it away."
-   One of his associates runs a spam-reading scam
    -   "People think it's random but it's not. It's the net trying to communicate across the inter-species boundary."
-   Protagonist has a room full of quants and hackers trying to keep track of who's got what.
    -   Everyone's supposed to publish under the terms of the Tokyo Convention.
    -   But everyone knows that everyone lies.
-   Countdown to midnight
    -   Rolling trades based on wherever you are physically
    -   Islands in the mid-Pacific are prime real estate, which has maybe helped with global warming a little
-   Protagonist is deeply cynical
    -   Doesn't realize how much things have actually changed
    -   How to add this without sounding naive myself?
-   Protagonist approach by someone who says, "I can handle eight hundred million."
    -   Puts two and two together: the other guy is trying to kill his client.
    -   The target isn't a bad person: she inherited from a disgraced pharma family
    -   Not even in the top hundred, and seems to be genuinely trying to spread the wealth
    -   "Without dropping out of the top thousand, of course."
-   Protagonist remembers being beaten up and robbed when an uncle gave him a hundred dollar bill for his birthday
    -   Tweaks things so that the hit man thinks all the money is going to _him_
    -   Along with billions of other dollars
    -   Just a trick to scare him (watch his face as he thinks he's climbing the leaderboard)
    -   Turns out to be an initiation rite at the bar where the crew gathers
    -   The hit man fails the test
-   The protagonist is the one who's tricked into topping the leaderboard
    -   Close but not quite to let him know how it feels
    -   It doesn't change him
    -   "If you're the sort of person who does this kind of thing, you're not the sort of person who has a conscience."
    -   "I guess you're not that different from your clients after all."
